O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	Oh you, very clear sons, I have completed this book that is the end of the science of medicine together with its fulfillment, and I have made the end by its explanations and by its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is fortified in our region and is extended throughout everything, it has perished the science and has been lost, and there remains nothing but the small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this comes the error and the vanity, and the minds are closed and the knowledge is distant.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems to me that I can revive this treatment together with the order of exposure and declaration and abbreviation; and I will bring together the forms of the irons of cautery, and other tools of the work with the assistance of declaration and preparation of it, as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	Because of this reason that no good master of hands is found in our time, the art of medicine has been extended.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for him who enters into this to master the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until he knows the judgment of the bones, and their forms and conjunctions and separations of all, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and sinews and the number of joints, and the understanding of veins moving and resting, and the course of their issue.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And because Hippocrates says that the non-skilled with the body is not much, and with work is little; and equally in the art of hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you in the introduction of this book that those who are not familiar with the things mentioned before, if they attempt to perform these acts may err and harm people; thus I have often seen many times more than one who engage in this science and abandon their sense and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a foolish man who lanced an abscess of scrofula or boil from a woman's neck, and lanced the arteries of the neck; because so much blood issued out that the woman died between her hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	And another case that treats a stone from a man of age, and the stone was large; it carried away with it a piece of the bladder, and died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	I had already been called for the extraction, and saw the position of the misalignment and the size of the stone, and if it was cut, it would have died.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And another case that took in care the Duke of our land who had his leg broken, and with the fracture came a wound; and the nurse restrained the fracture above the wound as a splint for a long time, and did not let any drainage from the wound, and thus left it in such a state that it ended; and he commanded that it not be moved; and so it remained until the leg was completely rotten and the foot and came to destruction.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and I hurried to come and dislocate the leg; and when I saw it dislocated, it was in a strange position and did not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But all the ways of the corruption were already confirmed in the member, and it could not be healed; and the corruption did not stop spreading throughout the member until the member was completely lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another method that collapsed the abscess and became putrid, and then inflamed due to its own evil.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a chancre, when it is free of melancholic humor, one should only touch it with iron if it is not in a part where everything can be completely removed that is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And therefore, dear son, it is necessary for you to know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: that is, where he is in many positions; and I will show in each part of this book where he has fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	For this reason, it is necessary for you to guard against him, so that the foolish people cannot speak evil of you if you take up your arms in battle, and undertake your tasks firmly and steadfastly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you come to salvation and be holy; and leave behind the spreading diseases of great sickness; and remove your doubts, and be ready in such a way that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	In some of his admonitions, Galen says: "Do not take on the care of seriously ill patients unless you are called a foolish physician.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatment in three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters are about fire cauteries and medical cautery abscesses, and the chapters are ordered from the head to the feet; and about the shapes of instruments, and the irons of cautery, and all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapters are about cutting and piercing, and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and the chapters are ordered and the shapes of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	This third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; it is ordered by the head from the top to the feet, and by the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Whenever we remember the work, it is necessary for me to explain the quality of the aid and the harm of each kind of condition.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality of aid and harm is the longest and most subtle speech and secret knowledge; and because of this, many wise men spoke about it and agreed on this; and I will not use too many words, because I make it longer.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that the fire cauterization helps universally in all conditions where there is matter, because the conditions are: it is to say hot condition with matter, and dry condition without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry conditions together with matter, some said that cauterization is great help, and the others said the opposite: that cauterization is not helpful for diseases that come from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	Because the nature of fire is hot, and should not be cured from hot disease by heat, nor by dryness; and those who said the opposite said that cauterization helps greatly with hot and dry diseases that come from humans.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	When you compare the body of the man and his moisture to the composition of fire, you heat the body flat.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it never by experiment.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And in all ways, it does not interfere with anything except those who have experienced it, and who know by long use the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of the constitutions of men, and their dispositions and causes of their diseases, and the remedies and the space of time; for other constitutions we do not have much fear, specifically in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the other wounds gathered and agreed to the fire cauterization.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, my children, that fire cauterization is one of the secrets of healing, and much greater benefit than burning medicine cauterization.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	Because the fire is simple, and only comes to the member that is cooked, and does not harm other members unless otherwise noted.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Burning medicines come from member to member by spreading, and bring diseases of great harm to the sick member; and by chance they may find the evil Fire for its high heat and because of the goodness of its substance does not cause harm, if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And I have found it by experiment and through the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it has been above the truth of things; and for this reason, I excuse the length of speech, because it does not please me to give you the secret which is reserved or fire, and the quality of the work, how it cures diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; now receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they should be done at what time the cautery is made, and then wait.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that the cautery is beneficial in all times, because the harm that comes from it is removed by the help of the cautery; and immediately if the cautery is for necessary pain, but urgent that cannot wait until the greatest harm comes to the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think, dear child, as the foolish believe; for the disease that is cured by cauterization has no return; and they say it thus, but it is not so because cauterization is only a medicine that moves the complexion, and dries the humors that are the cause of the pain, and it is as valuable a medicine for its swiftness of action and the virtue of its work and its lordship.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is possible that the disease comes back according to the nature of the pain and the limb of the disease and its virtue; and there are gathered in it the superfluities by the acquisition of foods and similar things, unless cauterization is administered in the place where there is little superfluity and moisture, as cauterization for pain, and similar things, and pain does not return much; but this happens little.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	Many people do not understand why cauteries are called the last resort of medicine, and it is true; but they do not believe that cauteries are effective after medicine, but rather their intentions are false, and it is cauteries that are the last resort of medicine because when we administer methods of treatment in any disease and they do not work, then we administer the cautery, and it is worth it.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, it should be understood that cauteries are the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of those who misunderstand.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that gold cauteries are more effective than iron ones, and they only said that because of the quality of gold and the purity of its substance; and they said that the wounds of a cautery do not fester, but it is not true as I have experienced, and I have found that this is so in some people; and gold cauteries are more effective than iron ones, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	When heating a gold instrument, you should not touch it when it is hot due to the color of the gold, and let it cool slightly; if it cools too much, then heat it in the fire; and so it has enough prevention.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	Because we use this fire cauterization that we have prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or I have ordered this chapter on the shoulder joints for you to find it easier.
dou cautere olivaire	The fire cauterization
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This fire cauterization is good for moisture and cold on the head, and there are two causes for a disease called «soda», and for many humors that descend from the joint as to the ears, and due to many dreams and toothache and throat pain, and also for all diseases that come from cold such as paralysis and soda and apoplexy and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cauterization is that the hairs are removed by medical solution, changing the skin III or IV times, according to the virtue and age and custom of the hair, which it can suffer; and then put back the head of the hair.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then let him sit cross-legged between your hands, and put his hands on top of your feet; after, put the root of your palm above the root of his nail between his two eyes; and where your fingers will be, if it bleeds, then heat the cauterization which is called «olivare», of which this is the form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place the bone signet of ink on the limb, and apply pressure and gently pull your hand back and forth; then slowly release your hand, and reward the limb if you see the bone slightly; and if you do not see it, start the fire cauterization until you see the bone as I have told you; afterwards take a little silk, and put it in warm cotton inside, and place it on the limb, and let it stay for three hours; afterwards put a moist cloth on burn; and leave it until the burn is healed; afterwards cure the wound that is called «tetrafarmaçon» until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And it was said by the ancients that the longer one leaves the wound open, the more it purges; and for this reason, it helps to heal.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And it was said that one should not heat the cauterizer to the point where part of the bone is burned, and then remove what has been burned from the bone, and treat it.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And the other said that one should heat the cauterizer to a high temperature, and if possible, remove as much bone as the width of the needle that women use for sewing, because it helps the humors to come out; and one should keep the wound open for a long time, after which it should be treated and dressed.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two methods of cauterization do not seem to be very good in all cases, except in some men where there is a view of fear; and I think that I should leave it; for the affected parts are weakened by continuous solutions of nature, as we testify in other members; and indeed when the affected part is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterization is more safe and mild for me, and of this use I work in such cases.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the ancient pain of the main
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When the main pain comes from chronic conditions and lasts a long time, one should use the affected parts, years and pills called «cochie», and of purging of head and eyes and plasters; and if one does the cauterization that we have mentioned before, and it does not help.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	When the injured person is of strong constitution and not too cold, then cauterize with that fire cautery which we have mentioned above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est I leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After applying the cautery to each of the horn's ends up to the bone, as we have previously mentioned, and applying the cauterizing iron called "vasselz"; and place it in the holes where you put suctions; and raise your hand so that you do not see the bone: the pain from this cautery is much greater than from others, and I will speak about it later; and it is necessary that the cauterizing of the horns be more subtle than the one used to cauterize the middle of the head, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	for the fire cauterization
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	when in a part of the head sudden pain comes, and the illness extends to the eye, and the patient is purged by medicines that are not effective, and other treatments have been done as I mentioned in the division of diseases, and nothing helps: then I apply cauterization in two ways, namely with a hot or cold agent.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	if the cauterization with medicine is that you press a piece of cloth, and remove the skin and wrap it around the affected part in such a way that you can replace the cloth outside the skin; and when it is replaced, hold it well and tightly and leave it for twelve hours; then remove it and treat further with a cloth soaked in oil, and leave the wound for two or three days; then put on a cotton pad soaked in honey until the pus comes out.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the application of ointment until they are healed; and if you see that some medicines burn, then follow the treatment of those burning medicines as I have written or advised.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The fire cauterization is done in this way.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cauterizing iron of such a form:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "clos" because the head is made in the form of a cloak or it has a small beak, and in the middle a small appearance; and place it on the painful limb, and hold your hand and gently press the iron, until half of the blood flows; and lift your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is before, and let out abundant blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After placing cotton on a sling, and putting it on the limb for three days; then cotton moistened in butter is placed on the wound, and the wound is dressed with ointment until it is healed; and if you wish to cauterize this wound with the cauterizing iron called "cultellare", do so at the tip, and be careful not to cover the artery in this wound which is not ancient.
de emigraine	of the wound
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat the wound as we have previously mentioned in the division of diseases, and it does not improve, and you see that the cauterizing iron before mentioned does not cause much pain and does not hurt much, then it is necessary to extinguish the cauterizing iron called "cultellare" until it is white; and in the same way, apply a line of half a finger's breadth to the painful limb, and once, with your hand, take out the arrow, and be careful not to cover the artery and that it does not come close to the bone; and be careful of the jaw that moves when opened, and the nerves should only see the moved part and that spasm does not cause pain, and be careful of the bleeding from the artery when it is cut, or when it is cut, there is great fear and immediately to the one who does not know, and who is not experienced; and leave the work in this way; but I will tell you how to stop the bleeding when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it appears in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	If you see that this fire cautery does not suffice for the disease, and the patient is suffering, apply the cautery to the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said or in the chapter of the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has two knives; and this fire cautery is better than that and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain in the ears from cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When the pain in the ear comes from cold, and medicines have been applied and other treatments as we have said in the division, and the pain does not move, then heat this cautery which is called "pointed", of which is the form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait X poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After pricking all around the ear, or both where the pain is felt in both, and distancing it slightly from the root of the ear as you have indicated the place of the sinus; and then apply 10 pricks around each ear; after that, cure the ear until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	of the mouth torture
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture that must be treated with caution is only those that move from the mouth, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not apply cauterization to similar things that come from scorching and spittle of humans.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you encounter this similar torture that prevents movement from the stream of earwax and throat cleaning, and it does not improve, then it is necessary to cauterize the pain with three cauteries: one at the base of the ear, and the other a little lateral to the temple, and the third in the junction of the two lips; and put the cautery in the part that opens healthily, and make the cauterization above a little bit off the edge of the ear, and another in the temple as long as a pinch; and leave the cautery so high that half of the care is burned away; and this is the shape of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it resembles the cauterization tool that we have placed before, but it is a bit more subtle and requires that the knife be a bit larger; after treating the wound as I have previously mentioned, as long as it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres: II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have mentioned, and it does not improve, and the pain does not have fever, then do four cauterizations: two on the two corners of the head, and one in the middle of the head, and one on the part called «vasselz» as we have previously mentioned, and the cauterization behind the mouth of the stomach; and treat it as we have mentioned before.
de litargie	of laziness
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease, one should give the patient large and modified pills to clear the head; afterwards, one removes the entire head of the disease, and places the mustard plaster on the occipital region, as written or treated with plasters; and that is the manner of the fire cautery: if it is done as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is thus healthy, good; and if not, one should perform three cautery operations on the head by descending just above the collarbone, with a space of one inch between each cauterization; and the treatment is as for the others, and if you have seen any strengthening, and the diseases are suffering, one should perform one cauterization in the middle; and if there is skill, two more above the two horns, and the treatment until it is healthy; and let the cauterizations which are called «olivare», as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of the cold of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary to clean the head of years and mucus that we have previously mentioned; after that, rub the head against the painful part, then apply fire to the head and on each horn, and behind and three times on the spine of the neck; if you have more trouble, and the body is moist and the pain is severe, and the disease is far, then apply four cauteries on the spine of the back; and leave it until the most affected part is healed, and remove your hand; afterwards, cure it as long as it is healthy, and let the cauteries that are called "olivare" be as we have previously mentioned.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use cauterization except for those that are fleamatic, and it is necessary to first modify the brain of years and other treatments that we have said in the division when the pains are great and suffering from painful medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a child who cannot suffer, give him gargling and mastication modifying the brain often with good meats; then feed him in the middle of the head, and do cauterization as we have said before, and do cauterization on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the pains are outside and suffering, do cauterization as I have said to those who have paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be olive oil according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the pain is intense, apply a delicate cauterization in this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to melancholy, the excess or corrupted humors and fluids are too thick, then apply a cauterization with pointed cauteries as we have said for those who are paralyzed.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to melancholy, the excess or corrupted humors are declining towards melancholy, and the wound is moist with a soft corroding, then give it to drink something by which the brain may be cleansed, according to what it was before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After bandaging the wound with a well-made linen cloth, like a circle, and placing it on the head; if the pain increases, and is held firmly on all sides; then present the liniment, and it should be made of old beeswax; and heat it gently over a moderate fire, so that the patient can bear it; then remove the circle from inside the bandage on the head, and let it cool; and do this to the wound every week once with another good government until they are healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Where you have seen cauterization done by making pricks all over the cauterizer.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This method of cauterization moistens the skull and increases it; then put on cotton soaked in butter and chicken fat.
de l’awe des eulz	of the pain of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When pain comes first to the eyes by the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and give the patient a drink of muddied water, and keep it away from all moisture, and make it sweat or bathe it several times a day on an empty stomach.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After that, command the patient to turn his head, and cauterize the head, and cauterize him twice on the two temples simultaneously, or once if it is not both; and cover all the cauterization with all the veins and arteries that are outside the forehead, and make the cauterizer long according to the width of the temple; and keep away from blood, and if you see too much blood coming out, then stop it with a cloth as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision of the countermeasure how you should do it; and never have they cauterized or heated anything outside of the two lower bones.
dou cors des larmes	The course of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are above the veins or outside the arteries that are in the appearance of the chief deformed; and one sees that it is superfluous cold flaccid, then one applies the cautery that I have mentioned at the beginning of this chapter: I cautery emmi the chief, and II cauterize above the two temples, and II cauterize outside the two lower bones; and if there is more, one cauterizes carefully from the sore to all the small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	through the path of tears through the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat according to what we have said in the division, and it does not work, then drink three harmful concoctions; afterwards, let the chief healer see it, and apply caustic or caustic olive oil; and make two cauterizations called "clavilis" on the two sores, a little outside the cheeks; and guard against the artery that you do not cover it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cauterization called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then apply the cauterization of this cauterization called "olivare".
de coi ci est li forme:	For which this is the form:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that you have made two cautery marks above the two arrows as long as the arrows are; and do not leave your hand except until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	the hair that does not grow oil
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	There is never the case that the hair of the oilz are converted to parchment, and they prick at the oil, and it is done by one cauterization in two ways: namely, by fire, or by burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow and are even, then place the hairs in your hand; after, hold the eyes above the paper of the eyelids a figure that is as much like the mirror as possible, and be the beginning of the sign beyond the hairs; then put cotton moilliet in the glare of egg and musk persillion on the oil, then heat the fire cauterizer in this form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing slowly and gently a few times, until the skin is healed; and the sign of health in the work is that you see the paper retreat, and the hairs stand upright at the point of the oil; then lift your hand, and leave it like this for three hours, then put cotton moilliet in butter until the burn is healed; after, dress the wound until it is healthy.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	If the hairs then come out, and the paper is softened, then restart the cautery on that same limb, as you did first; and if the hairs are missing, then cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural level, and is even, and do not prick at the hairs while they grow.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The cauterizing of medicine burning is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; then take parchment in the form of a maple leaf; then take French soap and live chalk, one of each, and grind them together well; and apply it hastily, so that it does not cool, then spread it on the form you have made like the maple leaf, and put it on the paper of the eyes; and if the disease remains only in one eye, then cover one eye, and similarly; and put cotton moistened with oil behind the ear; and the patient should be in a healthy state and show the medicine above, and press the poultice every time the patient feels the burning sensation of the medicine, for it feels like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then take the remedy to your mouth.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the blister is healed, lift the limb up, and if you see the paper raised as it was raised by constraint of fire or by incision; and if so, then it is good.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, then apply the remedy again to the limb or the medicine has not worked, until your work is even, and your eyes are steady; then put cotton moistened in oil on the wound until the edges are chosen, after care the limb of the ointment which is called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you have business that you must stay well in your work by great care that you do not cut into the medicine with those.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hair pricks in the oil, then the medicine begins again on the joint that is molded by the proper paper, as you have done before; after healing, as long as it is healthy; and this is the form of the fleece of the mire:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And since the eyes of men are different in size and smallness, and according to what you are constrained; and do not reply to the right way to that who is the study of this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	of the treatment of fistulas by cauterization
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat fistulas as we have mentioned in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not help, then it is necessary that you cauterize them in this way.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Command the patient to place his head in your clean hands; and wet the lint between your hands in this manner that it does not move, nor remove his head; then put moistened cotton or fennel seed oil behind the ear or on the forehead; then heat the cauterizer which is beside: and fasten it to the head as the shape of a pen of feathers, together with the queil so that it be the cauterizer; if you see, if it is appointed from one head to the other, and if you see, if it is also like a tent; but all the same, this which is fastened is worth more for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula, it has opened, and in tracing the pus, and drying it; and if it is closed, if it opens, and trace further from the bowels; after putting the cautery very hot, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part of the neck above the oil, that your hand does not do folly; and put the cautery in the grease of the oil, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery just to the bone, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, if you renew the cautery once more, and if you have experience, and leave it for three days; after putting soft cotton in butter, and the care of the desiccant ointment until it is healed, and if forty days pass that it is not healed, then put under medicine ague corrosive until the bone is discovered; and the king according to what he would come in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a certain method of cauterizing a fistula that no one of the ancients mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	To a fistula, and bend the limb; after place in the wound a fine thread of this kind:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	And they make of the quantity of a thread of wax; and hold your hand or the thread firmly, and do not move the hairs until the wax melts to its oil; and it is necessary to place above the oil on the hair a cotton swab moistened with some liquid or water: the wax hardens the skin of the fistula, and the healthy by marvelous health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the fire cautery that we have mentioned, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, then one must administer a puncture to the nose, and reset the fistula at the tip of the nose according to what it should be in proper place.
des crevaices en levres	cracks in lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times there are cracks in the lips that are called "hair", and also in the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as we have mentioned in the sections, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small cauterizing needle in this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place the patient in those cracks until he comes just before the operation; after the operation, remove the plaster from the limb as soon as it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the neck
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes at the root of the neck or in the eye, or in the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it has putrefied and rotted and aged and become a fistula; and you cure it as we have said in divisions, but it does not improve: then it is necessary that you use cauterization according to the quantity of the fistula; after bandaging or puncturing the fistula, and keeping your hand there until the hot iron comes to the mouth of the wound and behind the limb; and do so once or twice, after curing as we have said in cures, until it is healed; and if it is cured thus, it is good; and if not, if it is necessary to uncover the limb and remove the rotten bone, according to what you find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines but it does not work, then put the head of the painful tooth in your mouth; afterwards heat the cauterizer in a certain way that you place a cloth on the tooth; and put the cauterizer deeply and hold your hand steady so that the pain feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; then loosen your hand and restart the cauterizer according to your will; afterwards fill the painful mouth with salt water, and the tooth for an hour and a half.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in a similar manner, the tooth that was moving is stabilized, and the gum softened by being held back, and the moisture corrupted by drying.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When pain in the teeth comes from cold, or there is cold or heat, and medical treatments do not work, then it is necessary to use cauterization in two ways: cauterization with butter and cauterization with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cauterization with butter is such that you take butter from a freshly boiled pot, and the end in an iron or tin spoon; then take cotton and wrap it around the point of a tent, and wipe it in the hot butter, and put it on the painful tooth quickly and hold it until it is cooled; and thus do often enough until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see that moistened linen and cotton in hot butter is put on the aching tooth, and put a heated iron on it until the fire comes to the movement of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	The fire cauteries are such that you grasp a needle of iron or brass, and it should be large enough that the heat does not reach the mouth of the wound; after heating the cautery, from which the form will come out afterwards, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cauteries are cooled; do this often, for the pain will be as great the same day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is necessary that the wounds fill their mouth with good butter in the urgency of this cauteries, and then apply it; and this is the form of the cauteries.
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And do the fire cautery on the desired head, as you can; and it is in the form of a cross:
des scrophules	of the cross:
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrophules are watery and cold, and do not obey digestion by medicines, then heat the fire cauterizing iron with two openings for the fumes to escape on the other side; and put the cauterizing iron once above the abscess, as much as it can bear; and if the abscess is small, put the cauterizing iron according to the size of the abscess, and leave it for three days; and put soft cotton moistened in butter on the burn until the wound is healed; afterwards treat with ointments and bandages until the wound is healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the jaw:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When the moisture prevails over the channels of the porous, and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary to first remove the hairs by medicinal solutions; afterwards, apply cauterization at the root of the throat, and be careful not to come too close to the throat, and do not burn the skin but only slightly.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then apply another cauterization at the joint of the collar to the base of the spine, and let the cauterizing instrument which is called a "clavicle" be as we have described before; and treat the limb as we have said until it is healed.
de la toust	of the whole body
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When the whole body and disease of prolonged coldness are due to moisture, and the pains have no fever or sweat, and this is an ancient disease, then apply two cautery irons above the eyelids in their intended places; and the other cautery goes between the breasts; and let the cautery which is called «clavile» be applied according to the form that has been described.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see, apply cautery by pricking the entire cautery which is called «poins» because of the form that is described in the disease of the ears; and let the points be just under thirty, or around.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After treatment, the patient should be cared for according to what has been previously stated, and the fire cautery should be applied at three points in this manner:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And because the cautery is lighter, you should make three in one piece.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After, shave the hairs on the back and the side; then relieve the swelling inside the tumor with your right hand; and if the joint is misaligned inside, heat the cautery that has two needles in this manner:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and cauterize the wound until it pierces through to the other side, and bring four cauteries together; and because of this, the cauterization is made with the cauterizing iron that has three points, for which reason there are four cauteries; and they are the nerves according to the subtlety of a tent, and it is the shape of the cauterizing iron that has three points.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And never place them above this one nerve because there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After place the cauterizing iron on the wound and press with silk; after resting the pain, and do not move the limbs for a long time until it is well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above, this thing happens quickly, then make a fire on the thick side of the cauterizing iron, or many fires in grasping.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and it is healed by the moisture and is free from pain.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When cold and much moisture come into the stomach until it reaches its condition, and they are multiplied by his vomiting, and customary methods of cures do not help him, then it is necessary that the pain be soothed on his back, and he extends his legs and hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	After that, apply three cautery irons after the spoon for the amount of one dou, to all the cautery claw, and two cautery irons afterwards the two ribs until the figure of the cautery is at three angles, and have equal space between them so they are not joined together when they rub against each other; and let the cautery be so that it does not press on both sides of the chest, and let the figure of the cautery be in this form without twisting:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you see that the cautery is too large in the stomach according to this form, and the one who has fear of this cautery, cauterizes by pricking and holding above the stomach, and not according to the amount that you have seen; then cauterize all the cautery which is called «poins».
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the care of the cure that we have had before, as long as they are healthy.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver comes with pain from heat and moisture and great winds, as long as it is not removed from its natural condition by excess; and the hairs are cured of what we have said in divisions, and it does not help him much, then it must be shaved above its hairline; and sign of three cauteries according to this form and this figure and this quantity above the liver, under the hypochondres, where the ears of the ox come; and there should be space between each cauterization the length of a dog; and let the cauteries be long as the length of the body, and do not press much with the hand at all the cauterization; and let it lie down only half the cure, and let the hairs lie on its feet; and if it cannot, then it should be lying, and extend its legs, and lift its brows; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if your will is to cauterize these cauteries with a heated iron, if you are skilled and wise in the art, and guard that you do not burn all the flesh, for you would harden all the body; and that it does not come near boiling, for the flesh is very delicate there, and the skillful ones to see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When he has an abscess in the liver, and you want to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: if it is in the flesh, he feels pain but not very much; and if it is in the membrane, he feels sharp pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And when this cure is laid aside, it is necessary that the hairs should be shaved over his head; then sign the part where the abscess is, and then heat the cauterizer which is similar to a thorn, of which here is the form:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize the cauterizer until the curd is removed, and comes just to the surface, until the pus is completely gone; then follow the treatment of the wounds as long as they are healed; and it should only be used by no one except those who have long studied the art of medicine, and by whose hands these diseases have never been corrupted.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Therefore, it can be daringly overcome, and in all ways it seems to me that it is worth leaving it alone.
dou cautere de pleuresin	the breast cauterization
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that one should cauterize the breast with the roots of aristolochia, and in this manner: take a long root of aristolochia, the longest you can find, and let it dry, and let it be as thick and long as your finger; and moisten it in oil, and take the cauterizer to the fire, and cauterize the cauterizer between the breast and the neck, and two small cauterizers a little down in the part that is outside the beard; and cauterize between the fifth rib and the sacrum, declining a little behind; and one cauterizer at the bottom, and one above the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two on the lower ribs, and one in front of the one that is between the shoulders; and do not press your hand, but open it as if smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And they said that no man uses fire cauterization like the razor, and they extinguish it and put it between the ribs, until it comes to the abscess; and suddenly the pain is gone, as we have said about the liver abscess.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work, there is fear or the pain kills now, or a fistula comes that cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have said in the division of treatments, and it does not improve, then they resort to three methods of cauterization that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	In this manner, there is a way to do three or four cauterizations, lining up according to the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the liver cauterization that we have mentioned before; and do not press your hand on the whole cauterization, and let the hairs be on its back; and another way of cauterization is to heat the cauterization that has two needles, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the curtain that is near the mouse, or where the pain of the ear comes from the right side, and let the elevations that you lift the curtain according to the curve, according to the length of the body, and the cauterization should be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After you have boiled the two needles until the one that is held in the other part is perceived to be hot, then remove the cautery, and thus you will have four. And if you see, then cauterize the entire cautery with three needles.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment when it has been broken by long tension, and this is also useful for the other treatments mentioned before.
de ydropisie	of hydropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cauterizing does not work for hydropsy, except in the manner that is called "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you treat it according to the methods that we have mentioned in divisions, and your treatment does not work, then it is necessary that you make four cauteries around the belly, and one above the stomach, and one above the liver, and one above the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one at the worst place; and let the cauteries be close to the skin where the patient is most affected.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After leaving the fire cautery for a short time to cool, and not neglecting the care of the wound after the cauterization; and healing will be hastened, and together with God's help, both intentions will be achieved.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the fire cautery for the abdomen is like the one we have shown before; and for the back, it is an olive branch, as it was mentioned before.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the feet are swollen and have a yellowish discharge, it is necessary to cauterize above the back of the foot between the auricular and annular; and release your hand with the cauterization to return.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deeply, thus avoiding the yellowish parts, and let the cauteries be done according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After making two incisions on each leg at the tip of a sharp knife; and let the cauteries be long, one behind the knee in front and the other in front of the knee on the leg; and leave the cauteries hanging longer than to cure, so that the wound may heal from the inside; after curing the other treatments that we have said.
de la menoison	of the calf
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	When the belly solution comes from cold and moisture, as long as the retentive and digestive virtues that are in the stomach and in the intestines are blocked, and cannot be cured by other methods of treatment; and you see the patient suffering greatly and with great pain, then make a large cauterization above the stomach according to what he has spoken of before or the stomach cauterization, and circulate the cauterization around it; and four cauterizations around the belly subtly to all the subtle clavile cauterizations, and two cauterizations above the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see abundant moisture and the patient is suffering from pain, then perform fire cauterization on the knuckle, and one cauterization on each joint, and two small cauterizations on the stomach below the large one, for the cure is beneficial when it has good assistance.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the treatment of worms
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When the worms are deeply rooted, or one or more, and are ancient and are large humors that are cold and moist and corrupted, and are treated as we have said in divisions, and it does not improve, then perform cauterizations: three on the spine of the back, which is placed gradually and gradually in triangular, and one cauterization outside the abdomen two doses; and if you think that the stomach is cooled, and the food does not cook, and one sees the face swells, then apply a large cauterization on the stomach, as it has been said before, and one on the liver, and one on the mouse all over the cauterization clavile; and leave the cauterization open for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment, the limb when it is healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the cartilage which is called "thelul
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you cut the cartilage, if the cauterizing iron seems like a razor, and then put it all burned on top of the cartilage cut; and let your hand be so that the cauterizer comes to the base of the wound, from which the blood flows; do this once or twice, and if there is much cartilage, cauterize each part as we have said; after the treatment of painful swelling until it is healed; and if you cauterize with a large cauterizing iron on top of the cartilage, it will have greater help.
de plaie mal curee	of a badly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the pain cannot be relieved by a surgeon or incision, as we will explain in its place, then illness comes that cannot be healed except by cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When any fistula comes, and it is inflamed and discharged putrid and corrupted moisture, then you must apply a fine tent to the whole of it, and guard that you wash away the entire tent as much as it has.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After heating the cauterizer as if it were a razor, and pushing it into the fistula according to the amount that the tent has entered, and then start the cauterization again until those parts are burned and corrupted, once or twice, or three times, depending on the amount of pain; and guard against burning the nerves that are nearby, and large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	If the fistula goes to the center of the bladder and the intestine, then guard against these areas, and only perform surgery where there is nourishment, and think that it is not healed; after curing the area for as long as it is healthy, and if the areas are still sore, and the matter is removed along with the tension, then wash that area completely clean; and if the matter is not removed, then wash that area thoroughly, and corrupt the bone at the source; and thus like one of those that we will say in its area.
de la maladie des reins	of the kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain from the kidneys comes, and with great swelling, and does not take medicine, then it is necessary that you burn them on both sides of the kidneys with the clavile cautery that we have already mentioned; and if we cauterize in the middle, then there will be three cauterizations in a line, and they will be greater.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is small and weak from dryness and moisture, and the pain retains urine, then perform cauterization in the part before the bladder, where the hair begins to grow on either side, and each cautery should be as long as a pin; and also perform cauterization before the back, or twice if you have need; and let the cauteries be in the form of a cross as previously mentioned.
de la marris	of the marsh
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the marsh is cold and wet, and does not allow for conception, and the flowers are corrupted and late in blooming; and when they come, they cause great pain: then it is necessary to perform three cauterizations around the womb, as we have mentioned with the cautery of the bladder, and two cauterizations before the back; and let the cauteries be in the form of a cross, as we have mentioned.
de la hainche	of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moisture descends to the hip bone, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and it is found that the lower parts of the thighs are twisted, then you must cauterize the misalignment above the hip bone with a cautery like a circle, and sign before the joint around the hip bone as it turns, so that the hip bone is inside the circle; and if it is such a cauterization as that which has been cauterized in the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cauterization is not present, then make three cauterizations of the large olive grove, and let the cauterizations be done as all the others; and the care until they are healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain of the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the groin of the hip, and it is from cold and moisture, and the pain is relieved by what we have said in the division and the cure does not help, and the disease is ancient: therefore it is necessary that you purge the pain of heavy humors with fetid pills, or other good-smelling pills similar.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After the cauterization; and the manner of the cauterization is thus: it is to say together with medicines burning, and fire cauterization.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cauterization is thus in many ways, some of which are: that you cauterize above the groin of the hip three triangular cauterizations in this form, and do good depth and great, and have between each cauterization a space of the size of a finger, and let the cauterizations olive-oil; never made on one cautery in the middle of the hip, because it is there four in this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see, the cauterize with the cautery in a circle as we have previously mentioned in the dislocation of the shoulder; but do it in a different manner so that the circle contains the entire shoulder, and all the tendons are burned away.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the way to do it in surgery, when the pain remains in the shoulder and does not reach the thigh or the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it comes to the thigh and the leg, then make two cautery marks where the pain is located, and one cautery mark above the ankle four fingers wide, on the right side; and let the cautery be sharp, and burn away the tendons; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to the foot or near the knee, then cauterize where he feels the pain three fingers or four at the cautery called "finger".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if the craft is to do more; and if the pain is from the groin to the thigh, then cauterize with a surgical or circular cautery, and be very careful in all your cauterizations that you do not leave the cautery for too long, burning the nerves and large arteries, and causing greater harm and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	I myself have seen many who have cauterized above the ankle bone, and left it for so long that the leg was completely paralyzed, and the foot as well, and all the bones were perforated and rotten.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a bout of vomiting where they lost their life.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in both parts together, use cauterization on one and the other, as follows.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the wise say in the cauterization of the loins, regarding this matter, use a needle as thick as a navillon of a finger, or slightly less, and pierce through and from one to the other at a distance equal to the quantity of a thumb; and the piercings should be over two parts, and also like a comb, and there should be a good needle. And this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be cauterized until it is completely red and has a sense of heat, then place it on the board of the back misaligned, and turn it over to the healthy side; and cauterize once with the cautery and leave it for three days; and then apply a plaster of butter, and leave the wound open long; after the care of ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasis says that we use this cautery little because of its fearful appearance, and few see those who use it; however, this is a good cautery, which can bear the pain, and where it takes effect.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The cauteries of burning medicine are such that you make an instrument with interstices on the edge of the door, and it is either of iron or of tin at a length, and in the top has II us, and each amount of the groats of a dozen; and they are open below and above, and join together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After putting the bandage of the back to the misaligned part lying on its side, and quickly place your hand over the bandage of the back; then pour between the two circles of hot water that is heated at the fire I poc, and let it stand for an hour, and suffer the misaligned parts the heat and the burning of it.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is true that there is also cauterization with fire; and when the cauterizations have passed, lift your hand with the instrument and gently raise the waist from the wound, and leave it for three days, and put butter on it until the black scab from the burn is removed; and let it rest for three days until the inflammation has subsided; and this would be the last aid after the cure of boils as long as they are healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has spread to the thigh or leg, make the instrument that you have made for the waist again; and this is the way of the hot wound, and I have written it in the treatment of the correction of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take equal parts of quicklime and fresh chalk, and grind them together, and put them in a new earthenware pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	Then, if there is a small hole left, unless the point of a razor can fill it; and put that pot in another well-ploughed pot, and put on top of the lime and chalk and add boiling water until you have the second layer of powder as you have before; and let it stand until all the water drips out and the pot is ploughed, then take all the water and pour it over the lime and chalk as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And if it is very painful and administered in the form of medical works and cauteries of other members, for it does great harm like fire, and if it is with other medicines that are well cauterized on the back, such as mustard plasters and chalk mixed with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	Galen tells us of a cure where some were cured of the pain in the back and sciatica, and they were much healed, and said that no other cure was done, and that they were well after once this cure was made, and he was bathed as he teaches thereafter.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And in a similar manner, you should apply a fresh, green willow leaf, and grind it thoroughly with a little grease, and place it on the back, on the thigh, and on the leg where the pain is located, and tie it; and let him leave it for three hours and by the quantity that the pains no longer feel the burning.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then make him enter a warm bath until the heart is slightly warmed, and make him lie down, and the pain will go away completely and will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And warn that no one should use such remedies with cauterization unless it is after the evacuation of blood.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides says that when the vein of the sciatic nerve is cauterized with burning goat's fat, it helps a lot; and the cautery should be made in this way.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take another and beat it with old oil, and place it on the sinus that is between the thumb and the other one which is called the forefinger.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	Then take some dry goat's fat and put it in the fire until it becomes charcoal, and place it on the linen, and leave it until it is soaked; and do this again and again, and do not stop doing this until you think that it has reached the back, and that the pain has ceased; and this way of cauterizing is called "goat's fat cautery".
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain of two days
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or from impact or from too great evacuation, or from similar matters that are expanded and cold, none of these remedies is worth cauterization, because it is better to wait for the one who has just been infused with cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary to apply foul-smelling pills or similar matters on top of the back, where the pain is located, three lines wide, and in each line V cauteries or more according to the potency and quantity that the pain can bear; and let the cauteries be made with the cauterizer called "pointed"; and if you see, make III cauteries or IV at the middle cauterizer according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Many times this disease comes to small children, and the signs of onset are that they have a stiff neck when moving, and fear; and you feel in the last spinous process of the back and in us the appearance that comes above the other spinous processes.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you want to cure it, if you cauterize with the fire cautery in this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	If the fire cautery grips each part of the spine equally.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, then cauterize around the spine with the fire cautery holding two or three lines apart, and they are the points close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After the patient has been treated according to what we have said, and you should not administer cauterization in a place that is swollen with a nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When the pain of the joints is from moisture that is spread to each limb of the body, and when the pain comes in a sudden way, which is called "gout" properly, and when it is caused by cold and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauterization in this manner: apply the most cauterization around the joint, and let the cauterizing oil be applied according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	If there is doubt that you can hold the face of the patient during the cauterization, then perform the entire cauterization with the claim "not to touch".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pain comes from the jaw and other joints, and this happens often, then perform cauterization on each jaw with three or four cauteries of each part, during the entire olive oil cauterization; and if you have more skill, do more, but do not hold your hand further than the span of the healer's arm.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pain descends to the jaw and back, then administer the cauterization that we have mentioned in its chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, make points around the fingernails; and if they remain not in the hands, make points over each joint and over the hair of the hand; and if the pains come just above the elbow or just above the shoulder, cauterize each part, and give good management to the patient and proper medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you give good management and purge the humor, it will be healed with the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	of the breaking of the tooth
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When the breaking of the tooth occurs in anger, and the bile descends to the intestines and this is new, then it is necessary that when you see it to be healed, that it not move much that day; and that it use things that relieve the stomach, so that the pain does not come from its belly; afterwards make it sit on its back between your hands, and command it to tuck its tail as long as the bile is restored, and rub it against your fingers, and sign over the breaking of the tooth above the bone of the thumb, and a sign that is similar to half a circle above the body; then heat the cautery with this form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	until it is white and sweats senselessly.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then remove the mud from the joint; and the ministrant stains his hand above that they do not return backward; and work well the thighs at the shoulder, and put disinfectant on him some cussin and some serum above the thighs, and the other above the lowest which stains his hands; then put the cauterizer above the sign all over your hand, and the one that is right and the one that is long as you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, start again another until you come close to the bone; and be careful that the mud does not come out when you do the cauterizer; that you do not burn it; and that by this the pain does not kill him, or any other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And when you do not reach the bone with the fire cautery, your work is worthless.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And the cauterizer for children should be thin according to their size, and for large people, also large according to their size; after three days, care for the leg of the fire cautery until the burn is healed; then care for other wounds as long as they are healthy, and let the hairs lie flat on their back for forty days so that the wound is well healed; and it is important that their movements be restricted for a long time, so that the blisters do not form when they move around.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	After forty days, when he wishes to rise, he should be given a well-made bandage for forty more days; and he should have good rest, working little and avoiding too much drinking and eating, and too much heat; and if he follows this advice, he will be completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will tell you about the cure after cutting into his chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the tearing of the abdomen
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When tears come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow any more, then apply the fire cautery according to its quantity, and let it be the third part of the cure; after the cure, according to what we have said; and none of the ancients have said that one should cauterize at the cautery at three angles in this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but the first sign is the shoulder blade sticking out and make a line along the width of the tear, and another behind, and with your hand hold the entire cauterizing iron.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauteries are lighter and more gentle.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes to any limb, whether it falls or pierces, and this pain lasts long, and the medicine of healing does not help, then it is necessary to cauterize with the cautery called «pons», and the cauteries according to the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and its strength and its position of twists and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If the first cauterization is healthy, it's good; if not, start another cauterization above the first one, as it is customary that the patient should die at the member that is nearest, for which you must perform the cauterizations until the hairs are healed.
de meselerie	of mesmerism
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The mesenteries are often helped by cauterization with great help, and immediately the disease that comes from the putrefaction of fluids and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	If you see the cauterization, take care if the disease is at the beginning, and if it has been cured according to what we have said in the previous division, and does not remain or settle, and you doubt that the corruption will not spread throughout the whole body, then perform two cauterizations: I on the forehead, and the other towards the front at the end of the eyebrows; and II above the two horns, and I behind the tail; and let your hand be as close to the bone as possible, and as long as the scabs come out so that the vapors of the large humors can escape; and cauterize again on the mouse according to what is in front.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules; et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	And if the injury is widely spread; and it is clearly manifest, so you should cauterize with these cautery methods that we have said or chief, and the cauterizing in the middle of the nose, and two above the spine of the neck, and six above the spine of the back, and one large on the buttocks and one other below, and two on the shoulders, and two on the elbows, and two on the knees, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the fissures of the hands; and beware of the nerves that are above the bones, that you do not burn them; and never make a cauterization on the bone of the wrist, and one on the bone of the stomach, and one on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And the more you do cauterization, the less you should do assistance, and move it; and know that the pains are not felt at cauterization as they are felt by the healthy one, because the body is already corrupt.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	It should be that the cauterization is large and small according to the members and the joints, according to what you will find in the manner of irons.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After curing the wound with flour and honey and other cures until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When inflammation comes to any member and is cured with medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not healed, then do cauterization on the member according to its size and smallness; and let the cauterization be a little inside the surface of the cure; then the cure of inflammation until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And never cauterize with the hand and the foot and the back, at the end of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus it is stopped by the inflammation; and in any case do not interfere unless one knows the members and the outlets of the moving nerves of the body.
de albaras	et de l’albaras
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" is awakened, and medical treatment does not help, then cauterize with a cautery a little in advance, according to the quantity of the spice that cures, until the swelling is stopped, and its color is restored; then treat with flour and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and honey from colonies and honey from bees, each in equal parts; and mix all together, and apply to the wound, and bind it to the body until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of chancre by cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When a chancre first appears, and it is seen to stop spreading, then cauterize it with the cauterizing iron that seems like a circle, all around the edge of the chancre.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And it is said by many wise people that one should also make the cauterizing iron in the middle of the chancre; and I do not think this is good, because I believe it should not be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never seen it happen; and a better thing is that it be cauterized all around, with the cauterizing iron that is called «circle», as we have said in many places.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When anyone has a disease called "adubelati", and it lingers or dies slowly due to the excess it causes or because of its age when they are very old and have little blood, or due to tension; then you see it hastening to die: therefore cauterize around much with small cauteries pricking; afterwards leave it thus.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it piercing with the whole cautery, then warm the cautery from where this is its form:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the middle of this disease called "adubelati" until the cauteries have pierced the skin, and let the cauteries be such that the hairs feel afterwards in a similar manner as the course of the porridge is alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the cure until they are perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	The cure of fire by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another way of disease is called "corrodens", and it is nothing other than a certain amount of member, for it twists the members as if the dry reeds were twisted.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in the leg that can suffer cauterization along with fire, then heat the cauteries a little and greatly, according to what is necessary for the leg or the disease; afterwards cauterize all parts until you have reached all the corruption, and nothing remains of it, so that everything that is corrupted is removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	Then leave it three days, and place the wounds with oil, suffering from burns until the scabs of fire are removed, and all corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment of burns, it generates fever.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if you see after three days that healthy fever does not arise, it is good; and if not, then restart the cauterization on the part that remains corrupted.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this method has never been treated with medicine in place of fire cauterization; but all the same, fire cauterization is of greater help, and I have already given the cure for medicine fever in the division: take it when you have need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of the pearls that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Often times, when the feet are not washed properly, a disease arises which is called "clos" according to our understanding, and it is a great harm that blackens the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauteries for this disease are in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	That is to say, fire cauterization, and water cauterization with hot iron.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Fire cauterization is that you heat the cautery as if it were a pen of feather, and it should be made of good iron at the measure that it can penetrate the nail from all parts, and that it has thin edges; afterwards, put it all hot on top of the nail, and turn your hand around the nail until it reaches the bottom of the nail; and leave it thus for three days until it begins to rot; then make an ointment of wild herbs ground with oil, and leave the ointment all night, and the nail will fall off and be extracted from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the limb with oil, using a warm poultice until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are converted by the previous corpse, and often in hands and feet, it is necessary that you use cauterization with hot iron; and it is in this way: take a needle of iron or steel, or a quill pen, and place it on top of the nail and the skin, that is to say, pricking the warts; then place the needle on top so that it penetrates all around, then put a little hot water in a pot, and hold your hand tightly, and press your hand back and forth so that the edge of the needle reaches the root of the nail, and find the hot water way deep to the root; and let the pain of the hot water for one hour; then leave it like this, and it will all fall off at all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Next, do another one until you have treated all those that are in the body, then cure the wounds caused by a chariot.
li cure dou trembler	the cure of the trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee; et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When anyone trembles from cold or from a quarter fever or other, it is necessary that you make four cautery or four above the spine of the back, one cautery between each spine; and one cautery on the chest, and one over the stomach with the cauterizing oil; if this allows them to tremble, and hurries the health from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of pus-filled boils
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	No times appear by previous wounds, or pustules that come from large corrupted matters.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	If it is necessary to the first when they appear that one make a cauterization above each head of the pustule: a subtle cautery of mullein, of which the point is grasped in the fire, or of the root of aristolochia long, or at the lenticular cauterization.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And no times cauterize at the beginning when they appear, in this manner, and it cannot grow new ones, but is broken down the excess from which they come, and are healed; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Often there is great bleeding from the cut artery at the wound that comes from the surroundings, or at the incision of the abscess, or in the fire cauterization of the limb, and similar things; and it is a very painful thing to stop.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And in any case, when this happens, you must quickly place your finger on the wound of the vein, and hold it tightly until the bleeding is stopped, and no more blood comes out; then put the cauterizing irons of olive oil several times, both small and large, until they are all red; then insert I, or a great or small one according to the wound and the limb in which the artery is located, and place the cauterizing iron on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold it until the bleeding is stopped.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if the first one fails and you lift your second hand over the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then quickly take another from the ones that are in the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease to do this one after the other until the wound is cauterized; and be careful not to burn the nerve that is next to it, and that no other harm comes over the injury; and make sure that when the artery is not cut, that you cannot extinguish it immediately when the artery is large, unless by one of the four methods that we have mentioned: or by cauterization, or by extraction when it is not yet treated, or by a very thin thread, or by medicines placed on top that have power to stop bleeding.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever manages the tightening of knots closely with cloth or metal things over, or other similar things, does not benefit if not properly.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone and they do not have any medicine present, they should place their index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and tightly bind it as much as possible above the wound and above the vein; and they should not move it, but keep it moist with cold water often until it is congealed and swollen and bound; and make inquiries about what they need for cauterization and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	This begins the second book of remedies for tails
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter all diseases for which it is necessary to use fire cauterization, or burning medicine, and the symptoms and causes and instruments and forms of cauteries; and I will put this chapter about the lower jaw from the feet, and I will go to this chapter by the same way because one finds more easily what one wants.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And therefore when I begin this chapter, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and for this reason it requires greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you not to undertake foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many ways of people come for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	If they come from such people who are so with their illness that they die immediately because of the danger they find in their disease, and the greatness of its wickedness; and of these one must have fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And of these, there are those who give you their sense, and say: "Wait, I am hurt"; and the illness is spiteful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It does not matter whether you grant your consent to those who come to you with this manner, but place greater trust in your honor than in your desires, and do not open rashly but wisely of that of which you are certain, and which you have taken and lost; and use prediction and indication in the treatment of your illnesses for salvation to be converted; and this will help you to acquire good reputation, glory, and memory for a long time.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, Our Lords grant you good understanding and uprightness, and if you wish to breathe from the Holy Spirit's breath, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered you this chapter by examining other chapters, according to what is before the chapter on cautery, which I have advised from the beginning to the end, because you will find it more easily what you will have to do.
dou chief plein d’aigue	The main full of sharp
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	That this disease often comes to children at birth, and when the child's head is held too tightly; and sometimes it comes because of a recurring cause that one is not aware of.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease elsewhere than in children, and all those that I have seen were quickly killed by it; and because it seems to me that it is better to prevent the work in such cases.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw a child who was suffering from a sharp pain, and the head was growing bigger each day until it could no longer bear it; and because of the moisture, it died, and this moisture is gathered outside the bone above the sinus, between the skin and the bone; and the treatments are such that if the moisture is between the skin and the bone, and the abscesses are small, you should make a large incision in the head; and it should be as long as half of our nose, so that the moisture can flow out; and take out the form of the spatula.
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more severe, and the abscess is larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is outside the bone, and the signs that you see the commissures of the joint are open on each side, and the sharp pain persists as you press it with your hand inside, and it does not respond: then it is necessary to make three incisions in the following manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, remove all the moisture.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After the incisions are dressed with bandages and powders, and you put wine and oil, and leave it to dry for five days; then remove it, and treat the wound with compresses and counterirritants, and keep the joint immobile, and gradually introduce dry moisture as much as the limb is comfortable and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is that you look at the size of the abscess and the assembly of the needle; for it is never in front, never behind, never to the right, and never to the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Therefore, cut the size of the abscess and fill the needle, and make the incision according to what you have the ability to do; and be careful not to cover the artery; and if there is blood flow, it may cause the wounds to die from the flow of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	of return
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When it has any disease called "cataract" in the eyes or the pupil, and the disease is ancient, and the medical treatment does not help much, then the cure is to cauterize with what is covered over the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Therefore, when you see the hairs, it is necessary that the hairs make their way back to their head; after that, rub the skin with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then hold the hairs against the cloth in all directions; then look where the wound bleeds, and the ears on both sides are not far away, and they are quickly replaced; then sign the ears with a sharp instrument, then cover both with a piece of linen cloth, as wide as two parts of the head, until the wound comes out to the bone, and it should be through the width of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see, push the sharp instrument away from the artery and cover it above, cutting in the same way as it should be across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, if blood spurts out continuously from above.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open when felt, it is necessary to measure the quantity of space for three fingers, then bend and cut to the bone; and what amount of sane to put out depends on six centimeters, and perhaps a little more or less, according to what the wounds can suffer, and the replenishment of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains above the bone point, if the cope that we have sewn does not come out, then strain the wound and bind, and the treatment of ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	of a migraine
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When an ancient migraine comes, and the cautery is not effective, due to the moisture of tears and the heat in the temples and the old pain and similar things, and it is treated with methods of medical treatment and nothing seems to help, then we should cauterize the arteries of the temples, as we have mentioned.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of their extraction is that the hairs of his temples are pulled back, and one should listen to the artery that opens in the temple, because it opens well by its pulsation, and it is only slightly replaced in some people who are too cold; and if it is replaced, then one should strain the skin with some cloths, then rub the skin with some rough cloth, and heat the skin with hot water until the artery clearly opens; then take the sponge of which this form is made:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then slightly scrape the skin until you reach the artery, then cut it upwards with pincers, and remove all the threads that are attached to each part; if the artery is thin, turn it to the point of the needle, then cover that part according to the amount of the two chapters.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not covered, it will not heal at all.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And draw out six drops of blood from the vein, just to the third; and if the artery is large, it is necessary to tie it in two places with a strong silk thread, which does not allow any blood to come before the scab of the wound, and prevents the bleeding; then cover the excess that is between the two threads in the same hour, and then, if you see, if you cauterize the wound with the cautery knife just up to the bone until the chapters are covered; and this is the best work, if the hairs do not have fever and he is of hot constitution.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the fire cautery is to finish the moistures: because it is the greatest help for moistures.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	For the extraction of arteries, it is necessary to fill the wound with old cotton and place dry bandages on top; and when they are removed, apply dry medicines that create heat and bandages until they are healed; and if there is no bleeding from the artery, as much as you work, you must quickly cover it with a cautery, or you fill the wound with vinegar and hold it in your hand that the bleeding does not stop, and freeze the wound with cold water until it stops, and hold it tightly; and what is slower and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this cautery cutting from II parts, but the cutting should be well done to last longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	When the instruments are too tight, it holds less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus; et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it should have between the two knives a space of large diameter, and then when you have signified to fill the two grooves, and you melt the hot iron above so that it reaches the bone, and cope the vein in two grooves; and they should be separated between the two wounds because there is no surety of this cautery at all; and this is the form of the cauterization:
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes are flowing down the veins that are above the testicle of the chief of the phallus, and it does not profit much from medical care, and you see the face of the pain twisted, and feels like a throbbing; and it is often held and moist so that the hair of the papers is soaked, and the papers are discolored, and burned by the heat of the tears, if there is need for this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	They would call the old "wound healer," and you should apply to the affected area that has this disease with or without hair, then make three cuts evenly along the length of the front; and one of the cuts as close as possible to the top of the front, and the other two at the ribs above the papers, and guard against incising the arteries that are at the ribs above the papers; and move your hand away from the continuation of the two jaws, and for each wound, a quantity of three drops through the joins; and have prepared a piece of sponge and much cloth to soak up the blood, then boil the medicine from this form:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the incision that is made from the temple to the second incision; and scrape all that is between the two cuts to the entire syphilitic sore which is above the bone, then make another incision from the other side of the same second incision, and then extract this sponge.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If you push the tool that is called "cultellaire" into the first cut, and it is very sharp on one side, and on the other side is soft, not very sharp, and this is its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the sharp edge of the tool towards the back of the cut, and the soft edge towards the bone, and push it until it reaches the other cut.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And to all the vessels that descend from the head as far as the eyes until the incision is continued just enough to open the wound, and then make another incision in the same place on the other side; then extract the blood equally, and express the wound for the blood taken; then put a tent of old cotton in each incision, and put moistened cloths of wine and oil and vinegar over them, and guard that abscesses do not come; and the next day remove the leather, and apply great amounts of fresh turpentine, then the cure of basilicon with rose oil, and other cures that are used to heal wounds, until they are healed.
dou reume des eulz	For the eyes' pricking at their base
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When anyone comes for cauterization as usual, and you see the eyes tightly closed and small, and weakened vision, and burnt papers; and the hairs are shaved, and where the shaving is done, it causes great pain, and the limbs are numb; therefore, these accidents and that cauterization come only from many wounds, and the healing process that is, if this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And it is that you command the patient to turn his head back, then make a deep cut across the forehead, and another wide at the top of the nose.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	Starting from the right temple wound to the left, and make the incision up to the bone; and keep your hand away from the temples that move at the jaw; and when the bone is exposed, suck all the blood onto a sponge, then clean between the two lips of the wound and put cotton wool, and linen; then bandage with moistened cloths in wine and oil, and guard against abscess formation; when it is removed, it is necessary to rub the bone until charcoal begins to form, then care for things that cause char, which are done by injecting char.
En teil maniere: pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	Take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of brimstone, and make a poultice; and administer it in these wounds to draw out char throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the blocking of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that which enters the ears is one of the four things: grains, wax, stone or similar thing like iron; or seeds, such as beans, peas, or similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it enters the ear in the form of stone or other thing that does not stick to the ear, it does not grow in the ear, so put the ear to the sunlight.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the stone, if you drop a little purple oil or mustard oil, then facilitate extraction; and it causes nausea, and the nose stops when the sneezing comes, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and keep the ear up.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Often heals by this treatment; and if it does not heal, then apply gentle extraction with small pins, of which the form is as follows:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it heals with the pins, it is good; if not, then apply gentle extraction with small needles; and if it does not heal by this method, make a hole in the ear drum very hard so that nothing can enter with the needle; then remove it properly, for often it heals as we have said; and if it does not heal in this way, take some gauze and place it over the ear, and put any instrument that is sharp on it, and put a little cotton around; then press the gauze on the drum or whatever else, and remove it.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If she does not jump from all these things that we have said, you must quickly cut the ear to prevent abscess and swelling; and the way of the cut is that you first clean the pain of the cephalic, and extract the pus according to the measure of its virtue, then place the pain between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small cut at the root of the ear at the grease or where it depends; and let the cut be as a moon, until you reach the bone, then remove it according to your power, and suck vigorously at your mouth; and the cure until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is small grains that are in and it swells, administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, administer the following remedy subtly according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and administer an incision of that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not make it too thin when you think the grains are moist due to earwax, until you have made many pieces; then extract with fine forceps and succiner, as we have said, so that the extraction is aligned.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the case of the ear, then when it is sharp it is necessary that the hairs use sneezing of condition firsts, and widen the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let it lie across the ear itself or the sharp part.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it jumps out due to heaven, that's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If not from heaven, take many small and light stones according to the length of your finger, and heat them in the fire; and put the hairs one or two through the ear, and strike upwards from the other foot, and with another stone on top of the stone that is in the ear; and do not stop hitting with stone after stone until all the sharp part is out, and thus the whole thing comes out; and if you see, take a rod, and put one of the hairs into the ear, and the other hair grip with fire until the thinnest rod is burned; then do the same with other rods until all the sharp part is out, as we have said in the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the animal, if it is of small size, like a mouse and similar things, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is of large size, where one can feel it, then alleviate extraction with pincers; and it is the lightest thing to remove that is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms in the ears, when you treat it as we have said in the division and if you cannot cure it, then look into the ear with the sunlight: if there are no worms, then remove them with fine pincers, and if not, then take the cotton of which this is made.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And apply the most subtle touch to the ear according to the amount of pain, then it is often effective for the whole body; do this as often as all of them are visible.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not obey to issue, then strike around the ear with cotton as I have said in the stone; and if they do not swell as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have proven effective in the treatment of wounds, and you will find them where you can treat distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with this instrument, of which this is the form as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And if it is made of silver or lead, pierce the small pores and pour over the surface to distill; and to press during the distillation, use a well-made instrument of lead for this purpose, and if you see that the tool becomes dull, take the razor and wrap it around the tip evenly with cotton; then pour your oil or juice, and whatever medicine you see in the bowl, and the bowl should be in the ear; then blow through the razor all the cotton, and press your hand temperately until the oil is distilled or the smell from the ear; and the bad smell is inside, and the distillation should be slightly warm, just as it is distilled in the ear; and beware that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the stiffness of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without some stiffness in their ears; and the same thing happens to men by stiffness of wound, or from a splinter inside the ear, and this stiffness never comes out from in front of the ear, if one cannot see it; and it always comes out from behind the ear, and one sees it well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Therefore, that which comes out from in front, if one cannot see it, is from great pain in many positions, and in this case, where one sees, one must put the ear with the wrong side up to the sun; and look inside: if you see the opening of the eardrum at the same time as this space:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And let the smoke and steam go in front and behind all around, so that it does not blow into the ear; if the opilation is of horn or leather of the ear, then hold it with fine pincers, and the copper lightly, until that horn is completely burned.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the opilation is in the ear, then take a fine knife lightly and heat it a little in the fire, then put it on the copper where the ear is.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the opilation that the pain feels gritty to hear, lightly pierce, and make sure you do not injure the nerves of the ear; then put in the ear a tent according to the width of the wound, and moisten it with Egyptian egg.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do not move the wound until it is healed, or take a tent and moisten it with high rosewater, and powder vitriol on top; and if you see swelling in the ear, it is recommended that you remove the tent and apply another tent moistened with rosewater and wax, as long as the swelling is removed; then cure it until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if blood comes out, soak an sponge and wipe with cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other remedies that remove the outflow of blood which are used to treat distillations.
de la char des papieres	of the paper of the papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This is the method for treating the eyes when they are wet and dry: extend them with forceps and pincers, and remove the root of their eyelashes; then apply a piece of glass broken into pieces to the eye.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if there is no decortication, then cauterize the lens with a fine cautery, and the cauterizer after incision is useful; and many times they recur, but nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	of the gravel
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Often in papers come things that seem to be gravel in their form and hardness, and because of this disease is called "hail," and it is a mixture of large moisture above and below; the work is such: if the hail moves from one side to another, it is an easy thing to know; then make it wide, then scrape lightly each part, then take pincers and remove it.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you do not cover it with a puncture in the paper, it does not hurt the patient; and if the fracture is large, it gathers at a seam, and cure as long as it is healthy; and if it is small, do not make force, for the wounds restore quickly and heal.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the splinter is descending into the inner part of the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper, and place the splinter on a pair of tweezers, and hold it with forceps and press from one side and the other; and if the paper is displaced by incision, it does not matter; and when the splinter is removed, pour in some strong salt water, and cure the wound until the hairs are healed.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Exinach is a grease that is smeared on paper above the eyes, and it has more effect in children than in adults, and it hurts their eyes, and they vomit it in the morning, and they cannot look at the light of the sun because their tears flow to their eyes; and because they sleep on their faces, they have their papers wet beneath them that swell and appear covered with exinach which appears in the oil.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press on the shoulder to your touch and feel the joint move between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the way of the work is such that the hairs put their head in your hand; and then take a cloth of linen, and make a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that contains the joint on each part, then place it over it; and press on one side and the other, so that the joint is assembled within the circle; then make a small cut at the edge of the skin, not larger than the wound made on the vein; and cut the skin until you come to the joint; and in many positions of the joint, according to the form of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Extract the towel from all around you between your hands, and turn your hand to the right and left as far as it can spread; and beware that you do not insert it into the wound, that you do not bring the whole of the material close to the skin, that you do not wound it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if it does not exit at the beginning of the wound, then lightly scrape the wound until it opens; then extract it as we have said, then clean the towels in hot and cold water, and put on the limb, and bandage it well.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such men who break and put on the cloth to corrupt the moisture that remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the healer as long as they are healthy.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient comes to the healer with an abscess that is not ready, then the healer should apply dressings moistening until they are healthy.
des poilz des papieres	of hairs of papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc IIII manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When in papers hairs are born that are not natural, and are awake, if they harm the eyes, and cause various diseases as tears accustomed and softening of papers and egg, as long as it is the cause of the destruction of the eyes; and the cure is according to FOUR methods: or by cauterization together with fire, or by medicine water according to what is before or chapter of cauterization, and is made or by incision and sewing or by needles, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary to place the head of the badly aligned joint in your hand, then turn the paper with oil to your right hand; if it is converted, it is good; if not, if there is a needle at the end of the thread above; and if it is on the other side of the margin of the paper where the hairs grow between these hairs, and draw the thread above the paper, and return the razor; then in the part outside the paper, outside the hair, covering all the skin from the great calf to the small; then pull the thread, and place outside the paper a small cotton and bandage, then above the paper a figure of a sling, like the belly of a mart, and thus it is necessary that the figure be according to the amount that you saw lift the paper which is divided into all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	If it is a case where one has much paper according to how the paper is softened; then make all the spatula above the two lines that you have marked, and begin from large calf down to small; and let the one of the cuts near the hairs in the greatness of a root, then close the corner into one of the two angles of the needle, then scrape the skin; then gather the two lips to one seam of an needle with all the thin thread, and squeeze the blood, and dry the excess hair above the two edges to any things gluing, if you see to make this; and if not, if you have no care, then leave the seam and the threads up to three or four days; then cure the wound without sewn things dried and constricting, because the paper revives at the moment of the wound and its assembly, but the seam is rotten (as they say of the old), and it is work without fear; and if another way: and it is that you sign the paper in a shape that is as equal to the shape of the mire, as we have told, at three notches according to the form that is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then apply this remedy evenly according to the form that is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	If you cannot hold the needles, and the thing is not even, take a needle or it has a thread, and the thread into the shape; and the other thread over the great arm, and the second thread over the small one, and assemble between your fingers evenly; then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin where you have signed, as we have told you, then assemble the two lips of the wound by sewing, and cure it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with salve and similar soothing ointments; and never once has the hair of the paper been converted: so you must use what we have said about the incision; but the sewing on one and the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of wounds is as follows: first, convert the paper and the needle according to what I have said, and then make two needles by art, and two threads subtly as long as the paper and its width; and connect the two ends of the two threads where you hold the threads; then assemble them subtly above the paper of the oil, and strain the two needles from the two parts to form a whole; and leave it thus for some time, and the skin that was stretched will die and decay and rot, until it falls off by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it takes too long, if the connection is strong, then cure it until it is healed; and when the wound has been dressed, and if the paper has been removed, and the hairs will not grow back; and this is the form of the two needles that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width.
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The work is such that you grasp a thin needle, and you thread silk thread so fine; then assemble the hairs and hold both subtly, and let the lengths of the threads be a palm long; then order the other thin silk thread briefly in the hunt, and hold the heads of the hairs together, and place it on your hand; and let it be outside the sun so that the work is not discolored, for this is a subtle and fine work, then pierce the needle throughout the hunt in the root of the hair raised, and make it perforate the paper gently until you remove it from the natural hair; then stretch the hair up to the hunt, and pierce that hair, if there are one, two, three or more; then stretch your hand until the hairs come out throughout the hunt with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the bone is treated and the hairs do not come with it, then you must reset the bone to its original position, following the same path as before, until the bone is fully healed and you can see it through oil; then, if necessary, reset the bone and apply oil, and close it and leave it for two or three days, until the hairs grow back in their place and the char is formed on top; and if the hairs are small, accompany one long hair from the lambs' wool, and raise it with the other where you leave it, until it is fully extended and then lift it.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the oil of the oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease, which is called "aleacrati" or the palsy, comes in the oil, there are two ways: one natural and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it comes by sudden injury, or cutting, or cauterization, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the method of treatment in this is that you break that suture, and dry the lips of it, and put within tents of linen, and bind it until it is healed; and you should only use in its care things that dry and constrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, the disease will return worse than before; but in the work of things that are softening, such as fenugreek; and the rose of vinegar or altee and seeds of linseed oil should be cooked, and an ointment made from it, and wrap a tent around it, and care for this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasures of your care are that you take precautions that it does not sound as it was before; and this work that we have said is only to guide it so that it does not return as it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the oil that comes in the oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease that is dislocated which truly is called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accident comes from wound and cutting and cauterizing and similar things; and the way of the work in this is that you grasp a needle, in which it has a double thread, and the thread in the oil, and make it pierce from the left calf to the right, so that the thread comes out in two pieces of the oil; then the oil is placed on top of the needle, and the cloth is spread wide.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the paper's shape returns according to what it should be, it is good; if not, take the razor and put it in the wound, and turn the paper, and make two cuts where the edges of the incision you have made meet; and let the corners of the two cuts be sharp so that when they are joined together, the shape will be as if it were a letter with a straight edge; then remove that char, according to the quantity that its cost is from the paper, then add the two missing parts, and sew them with a thread of linen; then care for what we have said about mollifying medicines and tents, until they are healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from a cut or stitch or cauterization, it is necessary that you make a plain cut outside of the hairs and papers, as I have said before; then squeeze between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; and one must do the work according to the form of the disease, for it is very different in form, and the wise masters apply all possible means to how they can make the figure return to its natural form; and the patients themselves, according to what is necessary for work and instruments in many positions.
dou soudement de la papiere	The paper is soaked.
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this suturing is done by unskilled people in a somewhat way that the paper above is glued with the white of the oil, and it cannot move or do its natural workings, then you must therefore go to the outside of the paper with the point of a razor, and lift it up; and extend it with pincers, until you scrape off what is hard under the subtle skin, which should not be too hard nor too thin, so that the hairs cannot suffer that the skin is too hard and does not burn the oil; and let your incision, from which you scrape this assembly, cleanly, so that the paper regains its natural form; and is whole that entire assembly, and never use in acidic salty oil, and lift with alkaline sweet water, and with colloid; then put between the paper and the oil a linen cloth, and put above the oil wool moistened in abund of honey; and after the wound heals use colloid and other healing things until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the elbow joint
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	There are two ways the elbow joint can be affected: one is nervous and resembles a hard, rough surface, and the other is not nervous but resembles a frozen white moisture, which when touched with iron and heated with pincers cannot be removed; and both start near the large arm and grow slowly until they cover the entire eyeball and light and movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of incision is that the evil spirits put their head in your hand, then work the eyes; and lift the paper to your hand, then bend the elbow with pincers of small doubled-up, and place it above; then take a needle, and put some horsehair, or sheep hair, or cow hair, and strong thread; and double the point of the needle a little and insert it into the elbow, and push the needle through the entire needle, and tie the elbow with a thread and place it above, and scrape all the hair on the side of the elbow that shows the bone and the silk to the hair just above, then cover the remaining in the root of the arm to all the subtle sinew and with small forces, and leave the natural skin of the arm, so that by the incision the usual tears do not come out; and once it has been extended only to the elbow, and the thread, as we have said; then scrape on all the soft sinew of which this is the form:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be careful that the spatula does not touch the charred flesh and break it, and that the prunel does not pierce; and after the incision pour a little bit of broken silk oil, and a poultice made of litharge, and leave it on the other side; then care for the wound until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the joint is not yet nervous, and you cannot insert the needle, and the pins cannot enter, often this resemblance of a joint of medicines is cured; and they are born as I have said in the division, and if you see them covered, then work the oil of the evil, and take the spatula lightly with a slightly sharp edge according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And gently rub the angle above subtly, and if you see that it does not ease and the reason is close, then sprinkle from your mouth into the oil collar made of litharge and red oil and silk broth, and extinguish the oil just after; then continue the other work according to this same method, until it is completely healed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary to you in the oil, as an abscess, then milk, and first cure the abscess until it is healed, then continue the work as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh on the arm is black and night-like due to great harm, then soak it in oil at night, and cover a part of it and not all at once, until tears come out; then pour red wine colloquy which is made of litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that grows above the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Some men never grow red flesh, and cover the pupil and hold it above the papers and turn it to the end, and it seems like a baluster rose; and the work is that the hairs put their head in your healthy skin, then work the eyelids, and cut all that flesh with suitable incisions for this, and support it with force; then cover the first flesh, and go all scraping to the razor just to the end, and be careful not to bleach the oil at the work; and let the incision of the spatula that we have said in the incision of the finger and as small forces of which we take the base, as the form after this chapter demonstrates; and when the incision is accomplished and all the flesh is removed, then use the oil of silk broken or you distill red wine colloquy and similar corrosive medicines, and put on the oil above cotton with a bit of wool, so that it is ensured to prevent abscess; and if nothing remains, and the skin does not cover, and you doubt abscess, then leave the oil and cure the abscess with things calming abscess; then return to your work until it is healthy, and thus make many flesh is treated in oil by this way.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But it is necessary that you apply the cure of each weakness of the natural way; and of the accidental way, in iron work; and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that this member is suffering from that work.
des voines des eulz	of the eyes'
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	Red veins that are covered over the eye, and take away from the sight their work and weaken the eye always.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	The work is therefore to the first that you look at whether this eye, in which there is redness, is better, and if there is no other disease besides the redness; then the work in this way: command the pain to put its head in your healthy eye, then suspend those veins all around according to its wisdom, and let the circles be subtle double in this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And let them be done twice a day, once in the morning and once in the evening, in this manner:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then gently rub those veins subtly, and suck out the blood after an hour, until you can remove those veins from the oil; and be careful not to prick the oil with the points of the spatulas, and do this work at noon in front of the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not cause any harm to those veins; and when you have done this, distill green and red willow charcoal into the oil to corrupt what remains from before.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	If you cannot gather all the herbs in that hour, then apply a plaster over the oil of things that calm the pain of the eyes, and let it remain for some time until the pain is relieved and the risk of abscess is ensured, then resume according to this method as long as it is not healed; and this is the form of forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	from the hole of the oil
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The mire, if often called "arissati", is cured by cauterization and medicine, as I have said before, and it is not healed, then you should engage in what you did to the abscess, where it must die, and remove all the moisture that is there, until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed, and you see corruption and blackness, then the instrument of that which is in this form; it is called "rough chisel", and it should be made of iron from the same chisel, and it should be pointed as a lime if it is in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	Then place the rough chisel on the end of the bone, then turn it between your two fingers, and press your hand a little until you feel that that corruption is removed; and do this once, then restore the bone to remedies to dry it out.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the bone is still sound, and the wound is healed, and the body of the bone is sound, and remains thus for forty days, and it does not reopen and is not infected, and no bad accident happens, then it is considered healthy; if not, there is no other method than to bring the fistula back to the opening of the sinus according to this form: and you should uncover the bone the second time with iron, and by wet medicines, and when it is exposed again take the foret according to this form, and make the head of the nail at three angles, and make the tail of the nail attenuated as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place it above the bone of the arm, and move your hand away from the oil and the flesh, then return to the whole forearm until it pierces the bone and the patient feels the pain as if it comes from inside if he holds his hand on his neck; and when the medicine is dried, as I have indicated, and when the char begins to harden and stiffen the muscles, then the matter goes to the neck; so it is a lighter thing for the pain.
de l’issue de l’oil	from the end of the oil
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes are widely open and do not move to the neck, nor are they affected, then you must tie the pain; then clean it, then put on leeches or a hot iron to draw out blood, then put on the oil mixed with acacia, aloe, incense, and sarcocollis, and then strain the oil, and apply the plaster with bandages and cloths; the manner of the cloths is that you take cloths that are soft enough, and double each one in four, and then put one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eyes need; then strain it through a hard bendeil form, and start the leeches again to draw out blood without hurting; then remove the leeches and leave the oil strained day and night, and if the oil does not improve, then you must strain it more; then remove the mixture after the day and night, and if you see the oil improving, it is good; if not, then start the plaster and cloths and the mixture and leeches again until they are healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	forced removal of torn cloth
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions occur in the torn cloth, then open it, and if it is thick like a grain of resin, and is easily seen; then if you see that it covers, the work is such that you should put a needle into the root of the part below this above, then put another needle or it has double the thickness of the part of the arm; and let it pierce, and leave the first needle according to its position; then cover the thread double and tie a part of the cloth around, and hold it well, then remove the needle and put the salve on the wound with enough oil; and let it stay until the thread cuts with the cloth, then care for the oil of things comforting until the wound is healed; and once the wound is covered by a piece of cloth, tant qu’elle soit sanee.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes appear greatly protruded, prick them with a fine needle that comes from the front of the oil, and draw out the moisture and wipe off the eyelids, and place them together immediately; then remove them as much as they are healthy.
de la bowe de l’oil	from the front of the oil
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease that is called "alcunnati" is nothing but a collection of oil that descends in the oil, resembling an acute descending, and it is not sharp; and the way of appearance of the work is such that you make the evil sit above the seat, well-dressed and straight, then take the head between your hands from two parts, and move the mover until you see the collection coming to the top to your eyes; then let it be hidden, and do not wipe off and do not disperse the light, and see the evil things as they should be; and if it does not descend, it is not well-dressed as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If the painful part is placed between your hands, then take the thin spatula and make it slide over the corneal suture and the cornea and the crown, as long as the wound is open; and when it is open, then pour in hot acidic oil mixed with honey, or acidic or fenugreek is boiled and mixed with honey, then cure it with other treatment until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	of the acidic oils
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have experienced similar cases in the division, and what is necessary to pierce; if it works according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	It is necessary for you to place the painful joint between your crossed hands, outside of the light for the sun, and with clean oil pressed firmly; then place the paper of oil in your right hand if the joint is on the left side, or in your left hand if the joint is on the right side; then take in your right hand if the joint is on the left side, or in your left hand if the joint is on the right side, the instrument called «almagda», or in your right hand if the joint is on the right side; then place the point of the «almagda» instrument above the crown of the oil in the thinnest part of the elbow, then press the «almagda» instrument virtuously, and hold your hand until it pierces through the oil, and feels that «almagda» comes to the empty thing; and it is necessary that the measure of the way «almagda» be at the beginning of the space from the golden needle to the end of the noir; and this is the crown of the oil; if you see the bone in that paper for the clarity of the cloth, and then place the instrument above it or at the sharp edge, then express it one after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	if he has sharp eyesight now, he will see the hairs in front of him and the instrument in his eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After resting a little, and if he has sharp eyesight again, put the cautery with the instrument, and when it is stuck and does not go up, gently rotate your hand back and forth; then put a small piece of cloth over the eye and leave it inside.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then put in the eye that is soaked or otherwise wet with rose oil and plenty of honey, and bandage it with clean oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those who are of our time, put on top with plenty of honey.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the sharp object cannot enter the oil due to its hardness, because there are some men who have very hard eyes, then you must use the tool called "alberit", which has the following form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	Therefore, pierce only the conjunctive, and do not move too much in front, but make the eye subtle, then push the hard object, as we have said; and at the completion of the work compare to the pain and sleep that occurs, in which he sleeps on his back in the dark room; and avoid all movements, take light meals, and do not move his head to the right or left, and tie according to his disposition until tomorrow; then release him in this same dark room, and test his vision, and show him some things, and then return the bandage by the next day; and you should not do this in the first hour of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you raise the eyelid, because the sharp object hurts quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	When abscesses come, you should apply warm oil before the seventh hour, and strengthen it with what satisfies the abscess; and when it is calmed, then remove the bandage and put on a new one to cover any opening, and let it be set in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then slowly bring it out of the house little by little, and let it return to its place; and do not let any disciple intervene in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	Sometimes we were in Yrach, who told us that in some countries people would pierce the acupuncture point, because of which the aigue would succeed, but I have never seen any in our land, nor have I read any in the books of the ancients; perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the similarities of the shapes of almonds, because those who do not know them see them as such; and they are made of pure tin properly.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And their heads are of the same subtlety as their tails, and the back in three angles bent.
de la char sor le neis	of the horn for the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	Never are born or grow noses of different horns, for which there are some that seem like scorpions at the mouth of the feet; and if there are such, or if there is a horn with a bad color, and if there is a soft horn of good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In that case, of those horns which are soft and not enchanted, it is necessary that you make the pain between your hands against the sun; and work their noses, and pour the one in those horns, and remove them; for this is how you can hold the subtle sharpness of a part, until you know that that horn is all softened.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains anything that cannot be removed with any instrument, open it all the way to the deepest tools subtly and lightly, so that nothing remains; and if it is a pus-filled abscess, wipe it clean as it should be; and if it is malignant abscesses, hurry and cauterize it until the wound is no longer wet and all the charred flesh is removed, then pour out or drain off the pus and the sharp and sour wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If it does not drain properly, and moisture enters the palate, then remove it as soon as possible; and if it does not pierce as it should, then there is charred flesh in the bone above, which prevents the instruments from cutting: therefore, you must first insert a thin needle into the patient's mouth, and pull out the bad parts with equal space between each one; and put the bad parts of the thread into the patient's mouth through the opening of the neck, and draw it out until it comes out through the mouth; and many times they do this in schools, and it is an easy task for those who want to do it; then hold the part that comes out of the neck with one hand, and the other part that comes out of the mouth with the other hand, and cut them one after the other as we do.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Do this until you know that the newborn has not corrupted that stool, then remove the filth, soak the blood, and clean the filament in an Egyptian method, and return it to the nose as before; do this three times or more, until the filaments corrode all that remains of the stool; and then put or place a plug in the nose for several days until it is healed, and if it has a need for dry medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument for purging the head, by which one distills oils and medicines into the nose:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And it should be of silver or bronze, shaped like an open lamp, such as a plug, and use it in the same way; and if you see, make a closed plug, and let the instruments be plain for purging the head; and have one hand on the head to hold when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the worm on the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Often a disease arises at the tip of the nose called "telul", which grows and becomes large over time; and for this reason, it is necessary to cover it from the beginning, and to remove all of it, then place the cauterizing fire or medicine on the affected area; and if one delays in covering it when it is large, if it is hard, of poor color, and insensitive: if one does not touch it with iron because it is an infected abscess, for when one covers it once, great harm comes to the patient; and if the abscess is softly touched, not of poor color, and you see that one can cover it all, then remove the infection and cover the affected area without fear, and cure the patient of similar and restraining things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the bone is cut and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	If any solution of continuity comes from one of these cartilages, it is of little use, as in no men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, it is best to check if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then bring together the two lips at a seam, then treat it until it is healed; and if the lips are already decayed from one side and the other, it is necessary to scorch all the parts of their edge until they heal, then bring together the two lips at a seam, and hold them, and powder with powder of blood from a dragon, and frankincense; and put on the powders a piece of strong or other plaster, and leave it until it eats through it, then treat the wound until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The way of sewing is such that you assemble the stitches: either with needles, as we have said in the sewing of the belly; or with thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses on the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	Some people have abscesses within the lips, hard and small like grains, and smaller and larger ones; therefore, it is necessary to turn the lips, and prick each one, and take them with pincers and scrape each part; then fill the cavity after incision with broken glass powder, until the wound is not dampened; and then apply a poultice of dry things until the wound is healed.
de la char des gencives	of the toothache
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times the toothache arises from the gums due to decay, which the ancients called "albulus"; therefore, it is necessary to support it with forceps, and cover its root, and let out the pus or blood; then put on the tooth with a broken piece of glass, or other powders that strengthen and dry; and if the toothache returns after the incision, and often does, then cover it again, and cauterize: if it does not return after the cauterization; and these are the forms of instruments for covering.
des sordens	of deafness
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes the teeth are gathered at the tip of the gums, between the gums and the teeth, sharp and painful scars; and sometimes they are black and yellow and green, until the corruption reaches the gum, and are foul-smelling teeth; so you should put the pain between your hands, and its name should be in your holy book, and grind the teeth or the scars that appear, until there is nothing left; and thus make the black and green, and yellow and other stains, until they are clean; and if you remove what is at the first layer, it is good; if not, start again on the second day and the third, until you have removed everything; and be aware that the teeth have different forms of tools to grind, according to what the work demonstrates, because the file that is used to grind between the teeth has other shapes than those that are used to grind the teeth. And these shapes and others should be prepared with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when treating the toothache that you delay pulling it as long as possible, for no one should do this; for it is a substance very high and therefore we have no excuse to pull it out.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Then when the toothache is too painful to bear, you must be certain that the tooth is dead.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Often the pain of the toothache is relieved, and you should check if it is a holy tooth, and pull out the good tooth; and afterwards, the pain does not leave until the evil is extracted, for we have already done this to these saints; and when you are sure that the dead tooth is dead, you must burn around the tooth at all points; then pull it out with your fingers or fine forceps at first and then, as long as it is well loosened, then firmly fix the forceps; and let the one who has the toothache in your saint between your teeth, and hold it well so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After straightening the tooth correctly without breaking, and if it does not spring back, take one of these instruments and gently press it into each part lightly, and shake it as you did first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the tooth is pierced and crushed, it is necessary to fill it with rags where the cavities are; and if the instrument subtly has hooks, so that it does not break when pulling; and it is very important to work around the gum to ease the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And be careful not to break it, and that a part remains, and reapply the pain by the greater pain of the root of the first.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And be aware that you do not act in such a way as the ignorant ones who, by their haste and their boldness, break the chariot once and for all, and do not bring back what we have told; but they bring about great disease from the roots that they leave behind, or from the chariot that they break, as we often see; and when the denser part is removed, wash the limb with wine or vinegar and salt; and if blood comes out again, which often happens, use the leg in a solution of boiled oil; and if it does not work, cauterize.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The forms of instruments, by which one moves the first tooth, should be long pointed and large-handed, so they do not bend when you pull out the tooth; and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should be large-bodied so they do not bend when pulling, and they should be made of well-forged iron, and they should have teeth to hold.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the tooth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains when pulling, then you should put a soft cotton cloth on the wound or 2 or 3.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	until the wound is softened, then insert the forceps called "algefri," by which the patient resembles a beak of care; and they should be made like a shell, and this is the form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these needles, then it is necessary that you cut around the root completely, and put the instrument called «althali», which is a spoon, of which this is the shape:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And if it is too thick so that it does not break in two, and if the root jumps out through the hole, it is good; if not, then use all the instruments, of which the shapes come hereafter:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you use this instrument that has two prongs, of which this is the shape:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other instruments that are before in the region of the teeth, and of this instrument which looks like large needles, of which this is the shape:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And this instrument, except that it cannot break, and sharp enough to cut through many dense materials; and also other tools, which I will not mention; and the wise masters find their own tool by themselves, according to what their observations and the disease show them, because there are some diseases where the ancients did not teach about the tool due to the diversity of use; and if they break the cart or other bones, or it does not work, if they look for tools that they should have, as I have told you, and help with gestures, from which this form is:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let the bones be large and well-holding to hold the bone, so it does not escape, but it can hold and remove; then restore the limb with appropriate medicines according to this, and if there is decay in the bone, and it is small, if the doctor has all these instruments:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not according to the natural course, and its shape is ugly, and especially in young women, it is necessary that you cut out the tooth if it is not in the right place, and it cannot be straightened or filed: then use this instrument which has a shape like a small beak, and is made of iron with sharp edges:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the copper poker gently and slowly moves over the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can be removed, then the copper poker removes it as follows:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	It is also like the poker of which one makes the arrows; and in pokering the tooth gently and slowly moves over it for a little while, so that it does not move until it breaks; then at the end with any sharp instrument, and if the tooth is too thin and it bleeds the tongue, then one must remove the roughness until it is even, so that it does not bleed the tongue or corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	when they are toothache
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the tooth in front is aching, whether by pressure or by falling, and the pain cannot be relieved because it does not stop moving, and you treat them with binding medicines, which does not help; then they should be restrained with a gold thread, for silver wire becomes green and rots, but gold never changes; and let the thread be neither too thin nor too thick, according to the amount of the space between the teeth; and if you see that the teeth are moving, take the thread and double it between the two healthy teeth, then put the affected tooth in the middle of the teeth, if there is one or more, until you feel it touching the healthy tooth on the other side; then continue the covering towards the part where you began, and gently and skillfully restrain your hand until it does not move at all; and let your thread be attached to the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then thread the broken tooth with a thin wire, and twist it together, and place it between the healthy tooth and the gum, so that it does not bleed the tongue; then leave it tight as much as possible, and if it slips, or the wire breaks, then tighten it with another wire; if it holds, it will serve in this way for a long time, and this is the form of the teeth and the arrangement of the two healthy teeth, and the two broken ones, as you see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth is cracked, if it is reset in its place, bit by bit, as we have said; and it does not interfere with anything that is not wise and suffering, and never once is made in the shape of an animal's tooth, and it is placed in the place where the defect is, and it is tightened as we have said, and it holds and serves in this way for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	to cover the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	There is no joint that comes out of the tongue or naturally, which is born thus; or by accident of a wound. And the methods are such that you open the mouth with the tongue, and hold the head in your hand, and lift the tongue; then cover the nervous side of the large, until the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if it is hard or not, and it is due to a wound, if you boil the herb and cover the large gently; and be careful that the wound is not too deep, for the artery that is outside; and when you have done, lift the tongue with a cloth of rose and vinegar, or of cold vinegar, then put out the tongue a tent of linen; and moisten the sore every night, so that the wounds do not stick.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if bleeding occurs from the wound, apply a glass splinter to the affected area; and if it does not stop, cauterize with a slow-burning firebrand, which is good for the wound; then treat it with other remedies until it heals.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see that the wound is of a brown or black color or hard, and the patient does not feel pain, do not touch it, for it is a chancre; and if it is declining towards suppuration and there is moisture, pour water through an instrument with a thin spatula from one side to the other; and if it does not stop bleeding, apply a glass splinter until it stops, then repeat the process until all blood is removed.
des apostemes de la gorge	of throat abscesses
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	Never come from within the throat, which are called "godaths", and they are properly called the II mandibles, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, then be careful: if they are hard and small and of a pus-like color, do not touch them with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, also for the discharge of blood; but let it stay until it dies, and then you will break it off, or it would break by itself; and if it is of white color and the root is thin, prepare the instrument to cover, but first check if the abscess is at rest and is calm.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Therefore, place the painful part in front of the sun, and its members should be in a straight position, and the work of the mouth and the prick of the soldiers between his hands, and press the tongue away from all the instruments, of which this is the form; and it should be of silver or fine brass like some knives:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	If you press the tongue against all these instruments, and you see the abscess, take the needle and the hook in the amber, and draw it out as far as you can; then take nothing with, then cover the instrument, of which this is the form, that seems like a forceps; and throughout the head is curved, and one end the other, and they are very sharp, and it is made of iron or steel:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, use a pair of tweezers, which is shaped like this:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And on one side it is sharp and on the other side it is blunt; and when you have removed one of the arrows, remove the other in the same manner, and after the incision gargle the sharp parts with hot, sharp, and thin water, and if blood comes out, gargle the sharp parts with hot, or cooked pomegranate shells, or mullein leaves, and similar things, until the wound is clean; then care for it until it is healed; and never do arrows ever come out of the throat except the two arrows, so remove them in the same manner as the two arrows should be.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	I treated a woman with an abscess that was lodged inside her throat, namely a small abscess; and she had almost completely closed her throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the conduct that was obstructed, and could neither eat nor drink, and died if she remained thus for a day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so high that it had been placed in two jars through the two nostrils.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I therefore immediately began, and inserted one instrument through the nose, then the tube was passed through a large portion of intestine; then I refilled the other nostril with another instrument, and held the mouth open and pressed the tongue; after inserting the instrument into these abscesses, and drawing out a part, and only a small amount of pus remained outside; thus the woman was able to breathe again through her throat, and began immediately to drink water and wine, and did not cease cutting away at this abscess for a long time; the abscesses grew again and filled the cavity that I had emptied, so that it became very large; therefore I pushed it back in and cauterized it inside her throat: thus she did not grow again; and I left these parts and only God knows what happened to her after me.
de l’uve	of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When referring to the eye, and it is enflamed and long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is not large and round, it is called "uvetta".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help much, and you see that the abscess is calmed, and it is thin, then you must puncture it; and the one that is round and not long; and if it is bloody or dark red or black, then you must avoid incision of the.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger from the pain.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Therefore, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, of its breadth and length, you should place the hairs in front of the sun, and press the tongue against the instrument that we mentioned earlier; then make an incision in the vein, and remove it, and cover it with one or two of the tools that I mentioned in the incision of the two mandrakes.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And it is necessary that you cover only the excess that is beyond the natural end; for if you cover more, it will cause great pain to the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we mentioned in the incision of the two mandrakes, and treat it until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the pain is too great, then it is necessary to use a cauterizer for the sensation of pain.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of the cauterizer is sharp and hot.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And the pain puts its head on your clean hand, and then presses the tongue to the instrument that we have said in the chapter of cauterization, and applies with sharp and live heat, so that it is not too thick or too clear; and in the movement of this instrument, because of which is the form:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the head of the hair or medicine, as the movements of a spoon, and puts the instrument on all the medicine above the uvula; and the pain lies on its side, so that saliva and mucus flows from its mouth through the medicine inside, so that it does not drip down the throat and the blood; then hold your hand on all the medicine and press it on the uvula for a quarter of an hour, until you see the benefit and the medications of the medicine are calmed; and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and wipe the cotton in the medicine, and boil the instrument through the cotton to the uvula; and do this often, until the cauterizer is perfect, then let it dry for four or five days; and if you have the task of starting the cauterization of the medicine again, start it, and after cauterizing it, wipe it around the uvula with cotton soaked in butter, and clean what is around the medicine; and be aroused by sharp cold, and be treated with gargles until they are healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is more safe from the incision, than from the cauterization; if it is treated with fumigation in this manner, take chamomile and hyssop and origanum and rue and camomile and similar herbs, and all or some of them in a pot, and put vinegar in it, and make it boil; and the pot should be well sealed with strong earth, and inside the pot have an instrument like a comb in this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And it should be of silver or tin, and one of the pricks inserted into the mouth of the patient until the vapor rises to the eye through the nose, until the eye is dead; afterwards, repeat often, until the eye is dry, and guard that you do not make steam at the beginning of the appearance of the abscess, for many things happen; and do not make steam except at the decline of the abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	If this instrument is not present, take a cloth and place it inside the head, so that the tongue does not stick out too much; for the cloth does not cause the vapor to burden the mouth, and it is a good cure together with safety.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Often it is necessary to remove bones or fish spines from the throat, or nothing at all; therefore, you must take out what you can see, and press the tongue against the sun at all times with the instrument, so that you can see the thing; and what does not appear and is returned to the throat, it is necessary to make the patient vomit the thing as soon as the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps if the thing is removed by vomiting; or the patient has swallowed a piece of sponge, or a piece of naval, or a lettuce root, or a piece of dry bread; and tie the sponge to the thread, and then swallow it; and when it reaches the throat, it will stick, and then pull it out; and if it does not come out due to what we have said, take the instrument according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And the instruments should be curved at the top so that they can more easily enter the throat, and the head should be raised high; and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, that the tongue does not come, or push the bone inwards; and it is better that the hairs do not bite the instrument, because it is softer or the thing is as such; if it bites down, or pulls it all along the instrument evenly, until it is completely out.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the throat's softness
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	There is no softness in the throat, as I said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and if it does not improve, then look at the throat's hairs to the sun, then press the tongue against the instrument that I told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the sinew, then trace it with a small needle, or with subtle needles that are suitable for this.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if it does not work, then take a hair, and push it into the neck of the misaligned joint, then push or move the hair with the sharp edge of the iron, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the misaligned joint is inflamed all day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take full the cold ash of the inflamed joint, and work the mouth, and pour it in the direction of swallowing, and move it with your hand often; and if soon when the sinew feels the cold, it will be cooled.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	If it does not break as we have said, then fog the bad odor of putrefaction with the instrument I mentioned in the fumigation of the eye; do this many times, for it will stop without fail.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the way of the fumigation is that you grasp a pot or one that has charcoal in it, and place a cover over it perforated in the middle, and in that puncture place the instrument; then pour your fumigation, and put the bad odor in the mouth of the snake, and close the mouth, so that the fume does not escape but goes to the lungs; and the lungs will now stop, and if it does not cease, begin the fumigation again many times; and let the patient suffer thirst, and eat salty things and others, and do not drink anything acidic; and then it is the task that it should pass through this government.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument used to treat the throat, such as when one can see it, resembles a crooked hook to enter the throat; and it has the shape of a beak, and it has sharpness like lime, so that whatever it takes, it cannot wear out; and this is its form:
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapters on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	There are many types of abscesses, according to what memory comes after one and another in this book, and they differ in perforation and incision; and it is in two ways that the one is in its own shape itself, and because it holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second method is for the limbs that are at the waist.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscesses in the main part are different from those that come from the foundation, and the abscesses in the shoulder are different from those that come from the joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if there are abscesses that one should not pierce until the pus is fully drained; and if there are some that it is necessary to pierce as soon as they are ripe, and do not die as soon as they are drained, like abscesses that are beyond joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	When abscesses come from joints, and it is left there until it is surrounded by, perhaps due to corruption of the bone and the nerve of the joint, which is the cause of contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	When the abscess is near the main limb, and if you delay the perforation until it dies, it will harm the main limb; or if it is near the foundation, if you pierce it too late, it will not be able to stand upright, and will remain crooked inside, and there will be a fistula; and it cannot be cured in the long term.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it is necessary that you scrape the head of the abscess perforation according to its completion, and this is when the pain is eased, and the departure of the fever, and the lessening of the pain and swelling, and the reduction of the debatement and the relief of the main symptom of the abscess, and the other signs; and it is necessary that you make the perforation where it is most dependent on the abscess, and where it opens most easily; and let the perforation be long along the body, and if the abscess is near the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all equal places where there is no pus.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In these cases, according to the position of that member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when abscesses are in the limb, it is better to leave the puncture until it is confirmed by completed digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you puncture it beforehand, it may follow along with the flow of blood from it, and is stained with much feces; and perhaps harden the lips and penetrate deeply into it.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if any abscess that is punctured according to the width of the vein, according to what the limb has need of.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And it is necessary to treat small abscesses, small punctures; and in large abscesses, large punctures, and many cuts according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and if such abscesses or it is necessary to cover them with a cloth, and they are softened, then it is necessary to do so as one does with bandages: and if such abscesses are cut in three angles, and if such abscesses are covered like the belly of a mule, as abscesses of arrows; and if such abscesses or they make a round cut, and other cuts and coverings.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	For those who do not have a head, if the abscess is superficial, it is necessary to lance it completely; and if the abscess is large, and there is great swelling, and you lance it, do not draw out all the pus in that hour, but take out part of it; then stop the abscess on the other side, then take out nothing else; do this gradually, many times, until the pus is all out; especially if the wounds are of weak power, or women carrying, or small children, or old men who are decrepit.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the experienced never trust the end of the pus, that sometimes the wounds die, and you do not perish.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid therefore this chapter with great caution, and when you have perceived your abscess, dry the wound, and see if the abscess wound is small; and if it is a tailor complaining, mollify tents of linen or wool cotton; and if it is large abscesses, and there is much pus, it is necessary that you fill each one with old cotton or shredded linen against moisture, and tie it just above the wound; then open, and treat the dressing until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if there is bleeding in your work, apply sharp cold and cool, and wipe away the blood, and place it on the affected area for many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the bleeding persists, apply government and care, and the powders I have mentioned in this book, and if it is very tense, and if the wound or abscess is very painful, then it is best to put on bandages and wipes soaked in wine and oil; and if it is in a state of inflammation, and the wound is charred, then it is best to put on bandages and wipes soaked in cold water or warm water, as we have said; then drain the abscess and dress it and treat it, as it should be, until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And it is necessary to know this universally in the treatment of abscesses: now I have told you how one should proceed before treating abscesses, and see this chapter.
des soros	of sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	When small abscesses come from the sores, and are of ways that are in cloths, like the sweat of a horse, and many there are similar.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are also large and such abscesses that have moisture like chicken; and there are some that are hard and stony to cut, and there is no doubt if the artery is not against it.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of the abdomen is such that you try every tool called "intercostal", from which the shape comes after, something it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, then do it by lifting up from above the long.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is drained, scrape off without leaving any hair that contains that moisture, for it will return if you leave anything; then put cotton in Egyptian oil, if present; if not, in vinegar and salt, and apply it to the wound, and leave it there until the next day; and this will continue what is left from the night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then, as before, restart the cotton, and the second hour, and the third, until you are sure it will not stay all night; then treat the wound with ointment as appropriate, until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	If the abscess remains large, then apply the poultice in this form, long; and pour water over it, and scrape off all the skin, and put all your care into drawing out the pus from where it is. And if the artery opposes, do as I told you afterwards.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also do this for the abscess if it is pus-filled, and cut and treat as I told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And when cutting above the abscess, if it is more lightweight, as it is made of little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if any of these abscesses or swellings do not have moisture, and among them was the abscess I copied or the swelling of an old woman; and I found the abscess as hard as a rough stone, rough and white, and could not break it; and if one had tried to cut it, one would have made just as much pain as from a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses coming or swelling, those that come to the head of children and to the roots of the ears, the opening should always be made at the lowest point of the limb, in order to let out the pus; and cure them as it is necessary.
des scrophules	of scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	often abscesses in the neck, and discharge pus from the armpits, and in the groin, and are very painful, and are inflamed together with each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	and each scrofula is properly within its side, as with the neck and abscess of the jaw, as we have said; and similar scrofulas are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and there are some malignant ones that do not wish to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	In that one which you see of good disposition in the touchwood, and is similar to the color of the flesh, and motionless from every part and not attached to the nerve or artery or conduit, and not deep; then it is necessary that you cut it from above, and scrape every part, and close the two lips of the wound as one, if you have experience, as we have said in abscesses of the jaw; and peel it slowly and carefully, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or vein, which the hand does not escape, and do not see too soon, before you close what you do not need.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you cut the vein or the artery, and it does not let you open it, put in the wound vitriol broth, or some powders that stop bleeding, and close the wound; and leave it until the abscess is soothed, and the wound is softened, and then begin to poultice.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the wound is cleansed, return to your work, until you complete it; then ask your guide whether there are any small scabs remaining, if so, cut and remove them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if it has a vein in the root of the scab that is large, then you should not cut that scab at its root, but tie it with a double-strength thread, and let it drop through it, without harm; then fill the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then treat it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you remove all the pus, it is necessary that you gather the two lips of the wound and hold them together, then since there is no remaining excess due to the size of the abscess.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	and you should cover the root of it and pull out, and hold as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those abscesses that have excess, perforate where it apertures dead; and perforate thus as the one before said, depending, then apply bandages and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well dressed, apply charcoal ointment until it is healed.
de squinance	of squinting
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients spoke and said of the throat-cutter; but I never saw one in our land, and it is their written word.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	For those who squint, it is necessary that the edge of the throat, which is called "epiglottis," be avoided; and because all the veins and the root of the evil are in those who have abscesses chock full in the mouth, or in the throat or in the tongue.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the root of the tongue, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the danger of strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	Therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, we should cut it outside of three circles or four with a small incision across, between the two circles or by the amount of the incision through the syfac, and not into the cartilage; and those who do so are suitable for the section of the epiglottis that there is no harm, and the vessels are long and do not bleed.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the master is not careful, it is necessary to stretch the skin of the neck all around, then cut the throat until it reaches the cheneil; avoid the blood vessels of the vein, if you see anything, and then cut the syfac as we have said; and it is demonstrated by the section of the stream of the cheneil that jumped through the bone that is broken, and by the lack of voice; and leave the wound open for a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed for which there is doubt of strangulation, bring together both lips of the wound carefully, and sew it all together without the cartilage; then administer medicines that cause blisters to rise until they are healthy.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasis says that one should not do this until the throat is completely stiff, and the wounds are judged to be dead, and the defect has healed.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Then one should cover the epiglottis for this reason that the wounds cannot heal, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is kept from death; and because they ordered the ancients to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease had passed, which passed in three days or four. And then they commanded to sew the wound and cure it, as long as it was healing; and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw that a young lady took a knife and stuck it in her throat, and cut off part of the windpipe; and I was called to heal her, and found her as if she were dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the arrow that had come out of it, and although she had not sucked blood or poured water through her mouth except for her throat, and the blood flowed from the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hurried and sutured the wound, and cured it until it was healed; and she did not suffer any harm except that she was hoarse, and returned to her usual state; for I believe in the healer of the epiglottis.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	This abscess is called "hernia of the throat", and it is a large abscess in the color of a grape, and it is very common in women; and it occurs in two ways: natural, and accidental; or naturally without any cause.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accidental way is in two ways: one is similar to a large abscess, and the other way is similar to an abscess that comes from our artery; and there is fear, and it should not be opened except by a small needle, and it proves and searches throughout the entire introduction: if you find it as such, and cannot be drawn out at all, if it coagulates, like how we draw out the large abscess, and it is removed entirely, if there is any; and search for it quickly, and treat it as it should be, until it is completely healed.
des nous	For us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	Many ways we have, of which I will say all the similarities; and now it is necessary for me to tell the difference that is between us and extraction.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that extraction is cold and fever-keeping, until the boils are passed, and is accomplished by sweating; then the fever and the cold rest.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With our way, there is no cold or fever or pain, and it contains the abscess, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins as a small pustule, and becomes large; and they are according to two similarities, whether dry or moist, and many colors are as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	When treating a new patient, it is necessary to first examine and try the instrument called "entromissoire" according to its form, as described in the following chapter.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the method for examining abscesses is that you press on the wet cloth that you have placed in the abscess, and gradually increase pressure until you feel that the instrument has pierced through, according to the size of the abscess; then remove the entromissoire, and be careful not to cause a burst.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If the running wound is red in color, make it as I have described for other abscesses; and if after using the entromissoire there is no more running wound, then scrape it off if it is thick, and then cut it into pieces, and scrape off all parts of the skin where it was, and take the cloth away with the patient; and if you cannot take it away cleanly, then cut it off in pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	If there is nothing left, it returns to us many times; and if it stays for a short time without causing harm, then apply some corrosive powders to the wound, close the wound, and place soothing things on the abscess, and treat other ailments until he is healthy; and if it is great, cut out the two lips of the wound, and treat what remains with char.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	And if it is against you or other, and you are in a hurry, then apply the limb with broken glass, and leave it for two or three days until the wound heals, and rest the blood; then return to the copper that was left behind.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Here are the forms of instruments used for extracting stones, and there are three ways: large, medium, and small; and there are three quarters that are called "albaret", and one that is called "breb", and there are three ways: large, medium, and small, to extract the stones from fistulas; and they are like the needles that one uses for sewing, and they are made of gold, or iron, or silver, and they cost as much as those that are yellow, and they are more effective at removing black pus from fistulas; and they are three ways: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the size of the openings.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The shapes of nails are of many similarities, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and there are nails that have two claws in three ways; and there are nails that have three claws, and they are also of three ways; and there are nails that have two claws, and a single claw, and they are also of three ways; and all this is necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The sharpest of these are those that cut from one side only, and there are some that do not cut at all but rather scrape the skin, so that the vein or nerve is not cut; and among these are the needles that are replaced in a loop, so that the pain does not disappear at the opening of the abscess; and they are of three kinds: large, small, and medium, as you see; and one uses only a smaller one in places that are fleshy, such as legs, arms, breasts, and shoulders, and similar parts; and one never uses any other small instrument, resembling the scrapers of pustules, according to this form, to draw blood:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it is placed on no occasion in the wrong place, which is suitable for veins, and arteries, and always returns according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	No one should inflate the breasts of some men when they begin to rot, as if they were breasts of a woman; and they remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wants to cure them, it is necessary to follow this form of this line from b to g:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	then scrape the fat, and fill the wound with medicine mixed with charcoal, then sew the two lips of the wound together, and heal it until it is healed; and if the breast sinks down, and is softened because of its great size, like women, and cut into two pieces above, by the same fissures; so that one holds to the other at the end of one and the other, so that the largest line contains the smallest according to this form, from this line b to the line g; then scrape the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about sewing and powders, and what is necessary in the cure, until it is healed; and if it is not healed, or the incision is not completely made, because the pain does not want to rest, or because of the escape of blood, then it is necessary to fill the wound with moist cotton in a corrosive ointment; and let it remain until it draws out the remaining fat and the grease, then heal it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses of the ankles
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come from the ankles are hard scrofulous nodes or if they have spines, and there are some that contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Therefore, those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line b just to line g:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus that is in the abscess is drained, then apply old cotton to the wound and leave it until the other day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with a poultice suitable for this until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscesses are of similar appearance to scrofula, then treat them as we have said about incising scrofula, and if the wound remains open, then cauterize it as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the breaking of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is broken, and the skin above it is torn, then often abscesses form, and also there is blood in the vein and abscess; and if one knows that it is for the artery, then the abscesses are long and painful; and when you feel it with your fingers, it is stretched; and when it is for the vein, it is red and swollen; and it is foolish to cover this abscess, and especially when it is outside of the bones and joints and neck and mouth of many other places, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is therefore necessary to avoid the use of iron, and the one who is at the head should also avoid it, and in the one who is swollen due to arterial blood flowing through the long skin; then open the belly with small incisions, and remove the artery until it is exposed; then insert a needle from one side, and pierce the other side with another needle, and tie the artery with a double thread according to what I have indicated in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples; then do not pull the tissue between the two threads of an intravascular device until the missing part is found, and remove the abscess; then treat the wound as advised, until the flesh heals; and if the abscess is for the belly of the vein, it is necessary to stain your hand with what you can get from the abscess on all the skin, then remove the needle from the tissue that you hold in your hand, and pierce, and there should be a double thread, so that you pull it from the other side; then tie the abscess as I have indicated, or with one of the two threads of the needle; and if you doubt that the thread will not go through, then take another needle and draw all the thread of the first needle at the incision of the first needle, and tie the threads in four places; then cover the abscess until the excess is removed, then cover the wound and leave what is tied; then put a piece of moist linen cloth on wine and oil, then treat the wounds and inflammations until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses of the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Similarly, abscesses come in the artery and in the vein, abscesses also come to the nerves when they are cut, or from too much work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And this often occurs in the assistants and the two eyes, and in all the places where there are joints, and it is a great abscess, and its color resembles the color of the body, and it is in many positions with pain; and when one stretches it, if the pain is felt, and it is not inside the body, but outside the skin; and it moves from all parts, and does not go forward or backward, nor up or down, and that which is in the joints does not cover much flesh: perhaps there is contraction; and those who are at the head or face, making the skin to the spasmodic.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, if you have needles, and pierce it at its root; and if it is large, if you suspend it from the spine, and scrape it, then the bone and assemble the wound at the seam, and the cure until it is healed.
des grosses boces pendans	large swellings hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	Never occurs in the belly and never in any other part of the body, and is a disease called «fungus» by its resemblance to mushrooms, and has subtle roots, and large heads; and there are both small and very large ones; and I saw the man who had two or belly which were more like fungi than anything else, and had no difference, and were white, and had subtle roots, and were cut by moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I copied and found in one XVIII ounces heavy, and in the other VI З., and the work of incision is that you look to see if the hairs are moist, and the color of the arrow is white and moist and of subtle root; if the copper has a wide spatula, and it is present with you the fire cautery.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For in cutting often comes too great spurting of blood, and if you see the hairs spouting and bleeding from the incision of the iron, then take a well-made thread, and tie the arrow as we have said, and leave it for two days; then reset it, and do not stop pulling the thread through until it covers the arrow, and cut through it with work; and if the roots are large, then use the copper itself on the belly, but you must first cover the half, then cauterize so it does not return; then care for the wound, and guard that you do not cover the flesh which is of pale color and poor sense and of little regard.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	This is an abscess that has become infected, and I will come to treat this type of sore later on.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the body is full of blood, it is difficult to move.
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the appearance of the bubo comes from the wound or cut of the groin, and is above the abdomen and in some of the veins, as in other wounds, or of blood that has burst from veins or arteries according to what is before, or of suppuration; and if it is from the rupture of the groin and from the discharge of the bowel, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the blood, and it is a light thing without pain, and open from various outlets.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is for the issue of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses it to its two sides, it returns, and if it is torn, and enlarges greatly at the entrance of the bath and for great labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is for moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when one presses it with their hand, do not constrain much; and if it is for blood, it opens greatly by these signs of abscesses that are large and hard, and is filled with a quantity; and if it is for windiness, it is soft to the touch, and the appearance is whether it is for the blood of the artery or vein or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If you must leave, then let them care for themselves.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter on abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if the appearance is for the intestine or the bladder, then it is necessary to command the patient to dye his linen, and to be stretched out straight, then seal all around the bed; then command him to lie still between your hands, then go around the limb that you have marked with the entire length, then stretch half of the abscess above the great umbilical cord; then tie it firmly with a strong thread or a silk rope, and leave the other end loose; then open half of the abscess stretched above the ligature, and insert your finger, and draw out the intestine; if you find the ligature, remove it, and draw out the intestine from the belly; and if you find the bladder, take it at the opening, and remove the excess; and if the artery makes you go against it, or the vein, then go around carefully, then return to your work and take two needles, and insert two threads, and draw out the abscess as you have done in the cross that you will pierce; then stretch the abscess into four parts above the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave the limb until it can heal, and let the dead flesh die by itself; or you can cover it when it has become thin and ready to heal, then treat the limb as we have said; and draw out the pus or moisture that you have found, then treat the limb as it is necessary, and wash the limb.
dou chancre	1. For the fire cautery
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	1. For the fire cautery, we have described in the division the similarities of chancre, and how to treat it with medicines, and how to avoid the cure of iron; and we say that chancre is in the mouth, and great caution is needed in its treatment, and the ancient one says that when chancre is in a place where it can be removed as chancre which is in the breasts, and in the armpits, and in similar places, and all of it should be removed when it is in the beginning; and when it is large and old, if it does not require that you approach it, for I have never been able to cure any. And no one has ever cured any before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the work is in the place where it can be removed, as we have said, it is that you purge once the pain of black bile; then if it has manifest repletion, make the limb clean and dry for the work; then pour your sponges or chalk, and wipe all parts, and bone all parts without leaving anything; and let all blood flow freely, and wipe well the limb with your hand or something, and if the bleeding does not stop, it is contrary to the incision of the artery or vein, so cauterize until the blood is stopped; then cure other ways until it is healed.
de ydropisie	of hydropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have said in the division the similarities of hydropsy, and in what manner the assembly of the sharp is made, and the signs of each similarity, and the cure that is made by medicines, and that which is cured by iron: if it is only swelling; and one should not touch with iron in these two similarities: that is to say, tympanites and hyposarcoce, for it is a fatal thing; therefore when you treat this similarity of hydropsy which is called «eclites» by medicines, and the cure does not work, if you look if the evils are weak, or if he has another disease besides hydropsy, as all and solution of the belly and similar things; then do not touch with iron, for there is doubt; and if you see the evil of great virtue, and he has no other disease but hydropsy alone, and he is not too old nor too young, then thus: lean the evil straight up your hands, and the ministers press the belly pushing the sharp to the lowest part of the worst, then take the spatula in this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let there be cutting of two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	And let there be cutting of two parts at the tip, and make sure that it is not too deep so that it does not pierce into the intestines when thrown, and it cannot be bent; then check if there is hydrops near the intestines: if it is for the disease of the liver, then your cut should be on the right side of the third rib three fingers above the navel; and if it is for the gallbladder, then it should be on the left side, and it is not necessary that the hairs grow over the cut so that the superfluous do not run to the weakest part; then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and push, and remove your hand from the entire space between the skin and the gallbladder as if scraping at the quantity of an angle or around; then pierce the gallbladder until the space reaches the desired length, and that is the shape of the blade, then pull it out, and do not bend this instrument of which this is the form:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it is similar to a fine silver chain, and is made of thin brass or iron, and has in its part outside I small perforation; and where it costs one part, III perforations; and II of another part, and I of another; and the patient's tailor cuts it as a pen, and it is the form of the incision that the scribes make on the pen:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	At the top of the instrument is the needle, so that when the instruments come to the edge, if you now draw it downwards over the edge; then remove the middle or third part, for if you remove more than what is necessary at that hour, by chance if the patient dies from the resolution of his spirit due to the weapon, or he faints, or approaches death; but in accordance with the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the wound signify, and its pulses; then remove the instrument and retain the edge, and it is retained now for the one who stops the perforation that is above the syphilitic sore, of which I have spoken, that you prick according to this manner; then start the instrument again the next day, if you see the patient suffering as before, and take a small quantity from the edge; do this every day, and guard yourself against following it too much until it is only a little blood.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt the pain, and you let it be very sharp, then the cure of the sepulture or sand bath, and by much sweating or bathing and in the sun, and if it becomes tanned; and the cure of desiccative medicines until they are healed, and cauterize above the stomach and above the liver and above the spleen after the extraction of the sharp, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the stopping of the rod
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	No child ever is born without a wart on the rod, or the wart is small, or it is not in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is necessary to prick at all times with a very sharp needle according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	then put or puncture the very thin thread of silk in the bottom, and tie it and tie it thus for three or four days, and when he wants to urinate, if it is convenient, remove the thread, make him urinate, and then return it; and perhaps it is not convenient, because the urine that comes out does not leave it closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	If the one who is punctured is small, then treat him with a thin thread of silk, as we have said, and it will expand.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have the puncture in their joint are blamed, because no one is born with a puncture at the top of the thigh, so that they cannot urinate before their thigh is up; and they cannot urinate because the matter cannot come out of the marsh, and this is a very bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the manner of the work is such that the hairs lie evenly on their backs, with the head of the knife and the handle as wide as the tail of a pen, so that the puncture is made in the middle, as it should be; and beware of bleeding which often comes, and if it does, apply the same bandage as for bleeding, and treat the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	of the pustules of the knife
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Often come boils in the knife, and it is an ugly appearance; and there are both malign and benign ones; if you should prick them at once, cover and clean all of them, then put on a moist Egyptian bandage; then treat the wound until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if it is a malignant ulcer, with a putrid color and foul smell, then you must apply cauterization.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have cleaned it, and if the ulcer is deep within the flesh and extends inward and outward, then you must first remove the ulcer that is inside; and when it is clean, then treat the part outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you treat them together, do not be sure that the wound of the bone is not pierced, and if it becomes black and corrupt inside and out; then remove everything that is black and corrupted, then apply the ointment made from the skins of grenate pumpkins and vinegar, then treat with other treatments until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if bleeding occurs, apply the lunar cauterization as follows:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cauterizer should aid in the two dispositions: at the time of bleeding and during corruption; and if the pricked part is corrupted and retracted, it is necessary to apply a cotton swab soaked in piss on the wounds and urinate on them; and when the flesh is removed from the head of the stick which has been used for those who have not yet been circumcised, or if it is a wound or an abscess, then it is necessary to scorch it with the instrument of the hair, until the flesh is separated and released from all parts of the stick; and if this is a difficult task, then it is necessary to scorch it with the tip of the stick and the skin, then thoroughly clean between them, and then apply a thin layer of cold linen cloth, so that it does not heal again.
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not like other wounds; therefore, when we perform this work of our will, and properly in infants, it is necessary that we do the best work, and the lightest for health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not perform circumcision on their children, because they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have seen the greatest part of the masters and sages who performed circumcision in the midst, and with force, and at once; if it was not like this, there were two threads, and by chance if one cut above and the other below, it would delay the other.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or the recovery is prolonged, and the pain is doubled, and the wound dressing that is not secure at the point of the member; and the wound dressing of the joint by chance escapes the knife, and corrupts the work, and often they are born thus that they have no need of dressing and I have seen it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the wound dressing that is made with force to all the length of the thread, I have found the benefit of the experiment, because the forces cut as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you press your hand, it cuts equally in all the length of the thread; but let the thread be well stretched around the skin; and let the manner of the first work be that you make the child think, if he listens, that you are not doing anything but tying the thread around the stick only, and then throw it in all kinds of ways that you can; then put your hand straight on the stick and blow on it or kiss, and take it up high until the part of the stick is clean; then clean it well of the dirt that is gathered, then tie the limb with a double thread, then tie it on the other side; and let it rest in your pouch and at the second lesson to the pouch and the index finger, and bind between the two limbs, then lift the stick up hastily and take the head of the stick; then let the blood drip slowly and slowly, for that is the most dangerous; and put powder on it and on the powder a plaster made of one egg cooked in honey, boiled with rosewater blended with fresh oil, and leave it on until the next day, and cure the other wound as long as it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of forces for the mummification is as follows: the two arms should be stretched and thin, and the hands should be equal to the main hand.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of mummification is when the incision is made inside; therefore, you should extend it to your angle, also the copper, and if you cannot hold it at your angle, then tie it with nails, and then the copper.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they pass three days, and what is outside the rod is swollen, let it remain until the abscess is healed, and the skin is lightly scraped; then the copper as you can move it, and guard from the part of the rod, it will not harm.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cure therefore the limb of things unclean wound of powder, which we have said or treat of powders, and if one has too much care, it goes above, if it does not harm; cure therefore as we have said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	Retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	Retention of urine is due to oppression of the stone, or of blood frozen, or of bowel, or of charred, or of similar things, which we have said in the division; and if the urine is not released, and you see that the retention by the stone which is high or col of the bladder, then it is necessary to lift the hairs above their knees; and they are placed on the feet on the back, and extend his belly from the part above the back, and constrain the hairs as much as he can; and therefore the belly of the bladder is pressed against the stone above, for which reason the urine is released, and if it does not come, as we have said, and the hairs feel great pain, then it is necessary to administer extraction with all the instrument called «siringue», of which this is the form: and it is of thin silver hair, like the pen of an owl; and it is of a palm length and half, and it is thin at the head.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And the manner of the issue of urine is such that you take a double thread, and tie the head of the thread to the top of a piece of wool or cotton, and fill the tube with the thread; and cut off the excess of the wool and fill it with oil and butter and egg yolk, and make the patient sit on a stool, and the arse the urine and the stick of oiled and olive oil and vinegar; then put the tube lightly in the stick, until it reaches the root of the stick, then double the stick over on top of each other; then fill the tube before with the stick, and the patient feels the urine coming out of the empty thing, and this is not done according to this order except by those who lead or go there because it is twisted; then stop the thread at every little piece of wool and the urine follows the wool, then extract it far, and correct the urine; and start again the tube until the bladder is empty and aligned with the patient.
des maladies de la vessie	of diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When skin or blood comes into the bladder, or putrefaction and is gathered, and you see it distill acidic and medicinal substances, then use all the tool called «clepsedre», and this is the form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed, and if it has three holes: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and the threads by which the medicine cuts so that it stops well the urethra, so that they can draw out the moisture, and put as much as necessary; and when you see your medicines entering the bladder, put the head of the clyster in the moisture, and bring to the opening which is below; if you draw the moisture to the opening, and then close it strongly; the moisture will enter below, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient feels it; and this is the form of the subtle clyster with which one clysters the bladder:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it is of silver or of lead, and is the highest of the patient's chest; and remove it from where the ribs meet; then take a sheep bladder and put the moisture that you see clisterizer the bladder, then place it between the two breasts formed by a good double thread, and heat the poth over the fire; then pour the head of the clistere into the rod, then strain your hand on the bladder all around the moisture, until the patient feels that this moisture has come to the bladder; and if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle, and pierce it roundly around; then tighten the thread strongly in these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles a dough, and put inside what you see oil and moisture and vinegar, and tie it in the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, of pressing with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere	of stones
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have mentioned in the division the methods of stones and extraction together with medicines; and I have said the difference between a stone that is embedded as rain, and all signs, and in which stone one should open with a drill; and in the bladder, and in the staff; and I will tell you clearly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone that is embedded in the bladder often occurs more frequently in children, and this is a sign that the sharp pain of the bladder is similar to sharp pain in its subtlety; and it opens quickly, and causes great pain to the staff, and it can happen many times, and then returns; and at too many of these jumps, the foundation; and it is light for the healing of children until they are four years old, and it is very grievous in elders, and it is constant in those who are between young and old; and it is a lighter cure for those who have large stones, than for those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, it is first necessary to cleanse the wound with cloth, to draw out all the filth that is in the entrails.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it never blocks the way to seek the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the wound by the feet, and stand up and move it away from the body, so that the stone descends to the edge of the anus, and never goes up through the thigh; then place it between your hands, prepared, and your hands are away from your thighs, so that the anus is completely inclined downwards; then remove and touch it inside; if you feel the stone in the space, then hurry now to cut across the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if she does not cry out at all, then prick your right index finger with an oil-soaked needle, if the pain is sharp, or your middle finger, if the pain is dull; and place it in her foundation, and press the stone, and when you feel it at your finger, then moisten the neck of the bladder; then press upwards, and the stone will come out where you saw it cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the midwife to press the bladder with her hand, and command her to extend her right hand over the genitals, and her left hand to remove the skin that is outside the genitals in the part where the incision is made; then cut the spatula-shaped stone, which is the shape:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	When between the bones and the base, not in the middle but on the right side of the nave sinister; and the straight should be above the stone, and the tail should be at the foundation or below, and the tail should be narrow on one side and wide on the other according to the quantity of the stone, not too large; perhaps the pressure that is at the foundation, that it may not jump out of place; and if there are pieces of stone or angles, and margins: if it is greasy to issue; and if there are pieces that are soft, similar to a gland, and rounded, from which the issue is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	If there are angles and margins where it is, make the incision wider; and if it does not jump, it is necessary to strain it with nails that are as thick as a lime at the head, to prevent the stone from escaping; or you can use a subtle hooked instrument at the head; and if you cannot engage it thus, enlarge the pore slightly, and if there is no decortication, then strain it with vinegar; and if there are more than one stone, first strain the largest at the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then remove the smaller ones, and the others afterwards if there are more.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, it should be made larger, and a larger wound should be made.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For two things happen to the wound: either it dies, or the urine comes out through the opening that the sutures cannot hold; but no matter how hard you try to pull it, or to tear it with pliers, until you tear it into pieces; and when you have completed your work, apply envelopes of incense and aloe and dragon's blood to the wound, and bind it, and place a moist cloth on top of it in oil and wine, or in oil and vinegar and cold vinegar, to soothe the abscess; then close the wound over its collar, and do not remove the bandage until the next day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you reset it, rise the joint well with oil and vinegar, then treat with ointment and basilicon until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if an abscess comes into the wound and corrosions, and clots of blood in the bladder, and it is held back by the urine, which is known to be withheld without causing pain: then bandage the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will rot the bladder, and cause harm; then lift the wound with vinegar and salt and oil, and help in all ways you can until it is healed; and it is necessary that all the ointments you use, that you tie the two thighs together, and gather the medicines above the wound.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	If the arrow is small and it is conducted with a stick, and tied up, and the urine cannot come out; then according to what I have said before, you must cut it many times, or excuse the cut for this cure.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have experienced this myself.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take a piece of iron according to this form and be at three corners tied up in one thread:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take the thread and tie it around the stick outside of the arrow, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then lightly boil the iron in the stick until it reaches the arrow; and gradually turn the iron in your hand on the other side of the arrow, until you can pierce the arrow from the other side; if urine comes out immediately, then press your hand above what is remaining of the arrow that is inside the stick.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is already broken, and has sprung forth with the urine, and is sharp among the hairs; and if you cannot do this for any reason, then take a thread from one side of the stone and from the other, then make the rod in the middle of the stone between the two threads, then extract it forcefully, and remove the thread, and clean the clotted blood that is in the wound; and treat it until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	of the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It rarely happens that a stone is inserted in women, and if it ever does happen, the treatment is difficult, and is forbidden for three reasons: the first is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman who is well-kept and willing to expose herself to shame, specifically when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third way is that perhaps one cannot find a woman well versed in this art of hands; and the fourth way is that if the woman's stone is larger than the man's stone, it is necessary to make a deeper incision, and there is great fear involved. And if necessary, it is necessary to seize a skilled midwife, and point out the truth to her, and if you do not point out the truth, then it is not necessary to perform the operation; and present her with a safe knife in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to do what you command during the examination of the stone; and look very closely if the woman is virgin: therefore, it is necessary to place her foundation or basis and ask for the stone; and if she finds it, she constrains it outside her basis, and recommends that she place her foundation or with the pain, and press her right hand firmly on the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she finds it, she must move it from great to great, from the entrance of the anus to the root of the thigh; then cut into the bone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the thigh, where it is muscle-covered, and feel the arrow in that part; and do not move her body above or below the arrow, and let the tailor make a small hole in the first place; then sew up the wound, if you sense the arrow so sharp that the wound cannot be closed until the arrow can be removed, and know that many kinds of arrows are: namely, small and large, sharp and blunt, long and round, and those with rain.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	if you recognize the similarities to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if you do not know, apply a piece of broken glass to the wound, and hold it there for an hour until the wound is cleansed; then return to your work, until the arrow is fully removed, and have the instruments I mentioned in the extraction of the arrow help you in your work; if you do not know, and it is the artery that is cut, apply powder on the wound and bandages and ointments, and do not start again, and leave the arrow and do not pull it out, lest by chance the patient dies; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is calmed, and the wound has healed, return to your work until the bone is firm.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia carcinoma
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Ramice aquouse is nothing other than the assembly of moisture or white sac, which is detached from the intestines, which contain the urine; and it is called "sac", and never is properly in the bladder of the urine, if one wants that it be another bladder; and this is the skin of the intestine between the white sac that we have said; and it does not have a pouch without.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the growth of this branch is due to weakness that comes from the base, and it spreads that matter.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And sometimes it comes from the base, and this moisture has many colors: or it is a declining yellow to jaundice, or it is without red, or black, or watery white, and there are more; and these are the signs of knowing this assembly, because if it is white and flat as we have said, it is the abscesses, and not long since, like the shape of an egg, and does not open the joints, because it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if it has moisture in its own skin, it is the abscesses with part of the egg, and because of this people think it is another egg; and if the moisture is between the skin of the joints and the white yellow, then it feels bad; therefore when you see the color of the moisture, examine all the surroundings to find out why it has that shape before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes after the intromission, judge what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When we treat it with iron, it is necessary to clean the hairs according to the power and repletion of his body; then place him on his back, on something quite high, and cover him with much cloth; then bend over his right side, and command the minister to bend over his left, and extend the knife to one of the two ribs near the spine; then take the spatula and scrape the skin of the ribs from long to above the knuckle, and make your cut straight across the skin of the ribs just below the white face, and scrape the skin subtly according to the power; then pierce the white plain with a sharp and wide hole, and remove all the sharpness, and then put your forceps, and press the white face up; and do not touch the ribs except the white face itself; scrape the entire side of him subtly, if you do not scrape it well, it will return to the sharpness; and if the sharpness springs up at your work, then reset it in its place when you have completed the work of the white face; then sew the two edges of the ribs together at a seam, then treat it as the other wounds, until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you try to heal the wound that has been corrupted by another disease, it is necessary to tie the vessels that are suspended, doubting the flow of blood; then cover the wound with a dressing that is suspended, and extract the wound, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the bone is assembled in two parts together, since it is two branches; then cover the other part as you have done the first evenly, then suck out the blood, and put on the wound a cloth moistened with rose oil; and put on top of that another cloth moistened with wine and oil, and place two bandages over the two covers, and tie it above the limb that is in this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two cloths, and place them according to this pattern and gathered together by sewing in the neck of the breeches, and the one of the patient taken above the foundation just below the back, and the other at the part of the wrist; and the other head above the two angles, and all assembled the restriction in the loop of the breeches; and never is medicined this branch of cauterization in place of iron tail, and it is that you take one cauterizing needle fine, and cover the skin of the wounds, and it is heated as we have said, so that the white pus that contains the sharp is revealed; then take the cauterizer according to this form, and pierce that pus with short strokes, and the skin with this fine cauterizer:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And in all ways that you can, until you remove everything; and guard that the fire does not touch the eye; and cleanse this work so it is safer; and beware of blood clotting, and bleeding or other things, if anything goes against you, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	If the pain is not severe, and does not want to endure this work due to its horror, then use perforation as I told you; so when you are certain by the signs that we have said that the sharp object is laid aside, then place the pain on the raised seat; then pierce the abscess at the part that is away from everything widely, and put the perforation at the length of the body; and make the openings wide so that all the sharp point flows out; then put cotton on the wound, and tie it, and let the remaining sharp point heal; then treat the wound until the wound is healed; and if the white cloth does not let the sharp point issue from the mouth of the wound, then you must use a pen or the instrument that treats the sharp point of hydropiques, because its form is as before; and expand the wound, and make sure that the sharp point returns, and is assembled after six months or more, and when it is assembled as before, and thus the pain will pass its days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of abscess of the testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	There are many positions in this section that seem to me to be better left alone, and I will tell you about the work and similar things of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	Therefore, many abscesses come from wounds, and even in the testicles; and this is often the case.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	This is to say from excessive acidity and cold, which is spread in the testicles, or from impact; and the color of the abscess is according to the color of the blood; and it does not cause pain, and it is a grievous abscess; and perhaps some grayish, pus-filled, and yellowish abscesses come from a wound in an artery, or from inflammation of the vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is by the artery, it is known by the appearance of an abscess, when you press it to your fingers; and it should only be touched if necessary.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	Those who are made of blood drawn from a vein are known by their appearance of gentle touching of the fingers, and can often make a cut above this resemblance, and on other parts; and it is that you should care for the wounds, then put the end of the thread in the top, and pull out the thick white sinew, and deliver the suspensor from all parts of the wound.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the wound is already sore with these charges, then it is necessary to cut the wound and care for it; and if it is in the sinew, or in what is inside the veins, then it is necessary to remove all of that and care for it roundly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the shoulder is behind the neck, then it is necessary to cover it completely, and straighten the neck, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your surgeries are completed, apply the wound with a soft cloth in rose oil and wine, then use other treatments until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the groin
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is a kind of abscess surrounded by an envelope similar to a blister, with the softening of the groin, and the pain increases when it moves; and the treatment of this disease is as difficult as the previous one, and we will tell you the work of this in accordance with what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	It is necessary to sit the painful joint on the highest seat, then hang the suspensory ligament of the fingers down to your fingertips, and all the tendons that are close to the wrist, and tie them with the masters, and extend them properly; then cut the spatula sharply across the middle of the tendons, as far as they are covered, and then scrape from each part, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples; then take a needle or double thread, and tie it to the first bone where the blood came out, and tie the other end to the other head; then align them straight in the middle of the body, according to the length of the body, and cut through the corrupted veins; then cure the wound as with the others, so that none of the tendons are cut; for by this no harm comes, and if all the tendons come out, it is necessary to pull the tendons from all the tendons; so that the eye does not lose its sight due to the incision of the tendons, and they dry up and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	of the toothache
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The causes of this branch are from the section that comes out of the toothache, or from the extension on the stomach in the part of the inguinals, because the intestines descend from that toothache to one of the groins; and this toothache is either from the section of it, or from the extension of it, and these two ways of many causes come: from percussion, or from jumping, or from shouting, or from lifting heavy weight, and similar things; and the signs when it is from the extension of the toothache, are that it comes little by little, in long tension, and does not come suddenly; and it is the abscesses equal up to the pubic bone, because the toothache approaches the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it comes to the section of the tooth, which brings on sudden pain at the beginning, and is accompanied by various appearances of abscesses outside the skin, and it is for the outcome of the intestine and the heart due to the decay of the tooth.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And never with the intestines, and they are retained inside, and cause great pain to suffer in the patient, especially when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these cures of iron, for which one must be careful not to touch.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And the method of the work is that you command or pain to twist the intestine into your hand inside the wound, if it can be retracted; then place the neck above and between your hands, and loosen the jaws; then hold the head above, and cover all the skin of the belly with cloths according to what you have skill for opening the wound; so that the pus can come out; then scrape the tooth that is outside the skin of the belly, until the white tooth is completely exposed from all parts; then insert your index finger in the direction of the belly, between the white tooth that is outside the skin of the belly, and between the second tooth, and behind the belly, and between the second tooth; and move the tooth with your left hand inside the belly, and hold the white tooth high in your right hand, and loosen the belly towards the tail; and command the assistant to stretch the belly upwards, and remove what is behind the bandage; and if you find anything, if it is not intestine or white tooth hard, and if you find anything, insert it into the stomach outside; then take a needle or a thread made of twelve threads of wool, and insert it in the back part of the tooth, which is after the skin of the belly; afterwards the tail, then cover the threads with cloths, as long as there are four threads; then form them into the shape of a cross, and hold the tooth, which we have said is outside the skin of the belly, from two thick threads; then wrap the threads in two thick threads, so that none of the vessels that they may touch can enter into the wound, as we have said before; and finally place the first thread according to the round shape that the belly bears; then cover the part which is outside the skin of the belly, as we have said before; then apply soft linen in oil to the wounds, and apply the thread that we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And never cauterize the white swelling that we have mentioned after incision, due to doubt of bleeding.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this has happened many times, and leave the thread in place until it heals through it; and if it takes too long to fall off, then roast with sharp hot iron, and put on what we have said, until it heals; then cure the wound with other cures, until it is healed perfectly.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia carbuncle
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch, I have never seen anyone dare to perform the cure by iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients said that it is made in a manner similar to the branch that is together with the viscera, in a way that you tie the vessels, after the cut slightly above the bone; then cover in and cure the abscess with what works, until the vessels heal; and the cure as we have said, until it is healed perfectly.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Never come out of the joints as we have said, and open them wide; and let no one touch the intestines with their fingers, and if they do, it is little, and repair every hour; and in any case, if it remains too long at this point, the wound or swelling believes that the intestine is sending; and this happens by the extension of the swelling which is at the joints, as we have said, because it is stretched, then it is softened and inflated the intestines and opened; and the cure is by cauterization, as we have said before; and it is that the hairs are placed so often on their back between your hands, then cover the wound of the rupture inflated with the large according to the quantity of three fingers; and then draw the swelling which is outside the skin that covers it, then take the tail and put it on the wound of the swelling; and press against the front of the belly, then cut the two intestines appearing above the tail, and both; then draw the head of the tail, and do not cover the swelling or extend the skin or anything else, as I have told you in the cure of the intestines; then treat the wound.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the tendons, if you uncover and heal the wound, until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The ligament is tightly stretched, and does not appear in the fracture, and the cauteries are quiet in this place, and closer to healing.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the leather of the boots
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the leather of the boots is softened in some men, because the charcoal inside is softened, and it is visible; and it is a matter, when one wants to cure it, that one makes the pain lie on top of his back, and cut the softened leather over the natural leather; then gather the two edges to one seam, and if you see, first remove the excess softened leather at three or four seams; then sew between the seams, and cure it as with other wounds, until it is healed, and cut the thread.
dou chastrement	forcibly
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	Forcibly, it is commonly used in our law, and for this reason I do not wish to speak of it in this book; and there are only two ways for which it is necessary: one is that the patient responds forcibly when asked, and forcibly undergoes treatment; and the other, because we often have need to forcefully handle some animals to help us, such as a goat and a sheep and a cat and others.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I therefore say that forcibly is done in two ways: by traction or by cutting.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In the one that we do by traction, we make the animal sit in hot water until the muscles are softened and warm; then take them in your hand, until they are returned and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	For the chastening of the waist: it is necessary that you blacken the beast, and press the leather of the belts in your right hand, then tie the suspensor, and cover each eye with a cloth, when you have well burned them; and leave no drop of the sensitive sap and the subtle sap which is on the vessels; and this way of chastening is more effective than that made by attraction, because at attraction something of the belts remains, by which the beast desires luxury. Then cure the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	des hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermofrodie is found in two ways among men: one is that between the two thighs, open as wide as the natural figure of a woman, with hair and sometimes cutting into the urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other way is found in women, and has a penis like a stick and two thighs.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the treatment for men and women is that you cut off all the infected flesh, and treat them as other wounds; in the second way, of men whose urine sprays through the skin of the thighs, there is no treatment.
de la tentigene	of the tenting
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	A tenting device is a sharp object placed above the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see; and some women have had it as large as a hand, and that is the treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is necessary to clean the excess of the tenting device with your hand or tweezers, and gently remove it; and do not pull too much in front, because blood does not come out, then treat other wounds until it is healed; and for another char that is born at the mouth of the marsh, and use it, and by chance it jumps out, and it is according to the appearance of a cow, and because of this they called the old «cow disease».
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If it is necessary to put it back, as we have said about the tendon, and care for it until it is healed.
de erratique	For the shoulder dislocation due to moist
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	Erratic if is when the nature of the woman is not well perceived, or the pulse is small; and it is natural by birth, or accidental by disease that has come to be; or it is caused by a sharp injury, or a subtle or sharp poison, and is made in the marsh, or in the ribs, or outside, or wherever it may be; and they differ in conception, and childbirth, and perhaps the flowers to have; and the knowledge of this is by the look of the body.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	When the swelling appears to be near the surface, it is best to apply your fingers or a spoon.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is a subtle swelling, and it is near the two lips, then hurry, and do as follows: place your two index fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back, spreading her legs; then stretch the two lips, until the subtle swelling is removed, and it is over the swelling; then take linen, and dip it in oil, and place it on the affected area, and bind it to the woman every day, so that she cannot move.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the swelling is hard and sharp, then it is best to apply a soft cloth like a leaf of myrtle.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the wound is from a horse kick, if it is lifted up and covered; and have the medicines steeped in blood, such as dragon's blood, incense, and abundant amounts of wine; then apply a wide piece of cloth so that the wound cannot close; and thus leave it open for a long time, and then apply a tent of dry linen; then treat with other treatments until it is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when in the marsh there is a horse kick wound, if it needs to be covered, do so in this manner, unless it is an abscess.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For the abscess that is in the marsh, one should not touch with fire.
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that usually do not bleed, and when hemorrhoids become old, they become thrombosed; and we have said in the division the similarities of those, and the signs, and I will say here those that require treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I said that hemorrhoids and thrombosed veins, when they are first formed in the marsh, and do not appear until felt, if not treated with iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those that can be felt at the edge of the marsh are those that can be cured.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	Therefore it is necessary to put the woman in a cold house, then the thrombosed vein with pliers, and the copper at its roots, then powder over medicines restricting blood, such as acacia and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then boil her feet for an hour, then put her in very cold water; and if blood flows out, sit her in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate peel and gentian and similar things, and then take wheat flour, and make a poultice with honey and egg on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it is stained, it is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If not, make him sweat by applying suction cups to his back and breasts; then take the linen, and soak it in juice of plantain or juice of agrimony with old wine, and apply to the limb.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess is ready to burst, treat the limb with poultices until it is healed; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a harsh callus, if it should cover it as I have said of the thistle; and then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	of boils from the marsh
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many ways of boils come from the marsh, such as chancre and pus-filled abscess and herpes and estiomenes and fistulas and hemorrhoids and pus-filled boil, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	Therefore, I must mention in this treatment the boil that comes from the marsh, which is not among the boils that blister; and if you know how to treat with iron, look at whether the boil is aggravated at the beginning of its coming, and painful and feverish, and if it becomes red, then see.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Therefore do not rush to pierce, but make him wait as long as the pain is eased; and then place the injured part on a chair, and have two small stools where he can lean, and support it on his back, and bring his feet to the sides of the leg; and let his knees be spread, and put his arms away from his knees, and tie them together with a good rope; then place the bandage over his right side, and have the tool ready that is used to open the mouth of the wound, because after this comes the forming; and it is necessary that when you see this tool being applied, that you check the depth of the wound, so that what goes into the wound does not go deeper than it should, and does not hurt the injured part; and if the tool is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the wound with cloths, so that the tool does not hurt the injured part; and it is necessary for him to put the horn of the tool on top, and to stain the tool.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when the abscess is open, and it is done with the hand roughly, if it needs to be covered at the head, cover it with the spatula of lead; and when the wound is empty, it is necessary to put moistened lint in the wound with rose oil or dry vinegar; and place the tent from the wound to the back of the marsh, and place above the marsh and above the other clean moistened lint with hot or boiled mustard; then cure after two hours of ointment applying to it, until it is healed; and never lift the marsh and the wound by a poultice of boiled eggs and honey, and then boiled or rooted lily and aristolochia longa are cooked; then reapply the ointment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is stitched in the marsh, then it is necessary to be careful not to cook with iron, but cure it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	Midwifery is first in the delivery that she knows the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs when you see the woman approaching, and wants to smell the ar: then hasten the infant to issue; then scrape that childbirth is according to the natural figure, and is the second with him; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press his belly, so that the infant issues soon; for when it issues from its head, the second is with it, and is buried in the marsh by good cleaning; and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it never comes above its feet, and comes from the back or the shoulder, and the hands, or it comes above its belly, or sometimes, and is turned over by chance onto its neck, and by other bad shapes; so it is necessary for the bailiff to be wise and subtle in these things, and if she goes wrong and is deceived, I will show you all the figures as to how one should help her.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes out of its head naturally, and the woman gives birth painfully, and her strength is weak, then let the midwife sit on a seat, or the women hold her; and rub her with oil or fenugreek that has been cooked, and then give the midwife between her two fingers the smallest spatula:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	and pierce the second joint, and copper to its angle as far as the moisture that is now correct; and take the belly of the woman until the child descends, and if it does not, then it is necessary to clyster the woman with a decoction of fenugreek with oil of cumin; then let her drink and vomit it down, and keep her mouth and nose closed for an hour: if this now brings forth the child.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if both hands are dislocated, it is necessary to reset them gently and gradually; and if they cannot enter, then place the woman on a chair, and raise her feet up; then lower the chair to the ground, and tie the woman, so that she does not fall during the lifting; and if the hands cannot enter, and the child is dead, then cut open the abdomen which was previously opened, and extract the child, and reset it equally.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	from the issue of the child above its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes up to its feet, then it is necessary to put it on top; and then slowly turn it and turn it, until it is even; then take both feet and extend them slowly and slowly.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If it jumps up to the knees, then command it to grab, and let it spit out the condition; if it jumps farther, may God will it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not jump as we have said, then slowly turn it and turn it, until it is according to the natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	Because then it is completely straight.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	If it does not come out as we have described, take a handful of high-quality oak sawdust, and oil of savory, and melted gum, and grind everything in a mortar; and put on the natural form of the woman inside and outside this bandage, then make her sit upright until above the ribs; and when she is softened from above, make her a mustard poultice, and put it on, and leave it for an hour; then make her sit on a chair, then make her vomit and hold her mouth and nose, and lightly press her belly, for the child is now born.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	from the issue of the child upon its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this form, if you put the blanket under its hands; then place it on its back, and hang its feet down, and let it lie on the bed; then gently fold its hands, and take its hands over its belly, and remove its cussins until it is clean from below; and if the child does not move, take its feet and gently move its belly upwards, then push your hands under its belly; and slowly bring the child up; and gradually feed the child.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the birth of a child who comes out wide with one hand extending
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	It is necessary to bring back the hand: if it cannot be brought back, lift the woman, and go; if she cannot go, I make her lie on the bed, and stretch out her legs; then relieve the muscle that I have mentioned; and if she does not give birth, I make her sit on the chair, then study to bring back the hand; and as the child, according to the natural figure, and I command it to breathe until the child is born.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	of the birth of a child on its neck, and it has extended its hands, and its face turned towards the back of its mother
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	It is necessary that the bleeder wash his hand, then slowly and gradually turn it over, and lightly rub it; and when it is even, if it is muscle-bound and stiff, as we have said, then make her move slowly and gradually; and when you have done this, make her sit on the seat, and command her to defecate; and make her evacuate.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In the same manner, for all the other limbs.
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it comes to doing this for all the other limbs, if the second person cooperates with your hand, until the moisture is drained; and if the infant's head and neck can be covered with a cloth, do not retain it, and make the child breathe; then feed the child inside, as you wish, and command the woman to defecate once: then it is easily done.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the issue of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	It is often the case that twins are born, and sometimes they are born three or four at a time; and this is not an uncommon thing, and it happens quite often.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	It is strange that they do not live, unless they are named; I know why they are multiplied, and are separated by the suture which binds them together, which is called the septum; and sometimes they are born as naturally as any other child, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they are born very badly, as we have said the care should be, and if the afterbirth is subtle, and it does what it is supposed to do quickly and gently, then it should be done in such a way that it is beneficial for their health.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	None are formed in the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, or more than fifteen, and all are formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of the skilled physician, and it is necessary that the bailiff should know everything, because by chance similar things happen to him; so do accordingly as it is necessary.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you are treating the woman of the dead child or belly, as I have said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are forced to handwork; if the woman is of sound virtue and has no accident or fear of death; then it is necessary that you should know whether the woman is lying on her back, and her arms leaning down, and her legs raised; and the midwife should use two fingers, or she is tied to the bed so that she is not treated for the delivery of the child; then wipe the mouth of the mother with oily moist cloths with mustard and fenugreek and linseed, then put the midwife's hands in these oils and these mustards; then apply them lightly to the mother, then if she bites the instruments that are suitable for her, and if the child is wrapped in a blanket that is appropriate, and if it is not apparent that it has descended over its head; then put the instruments in her eyes or her collar or her mouth or in her palate or behind the beard or in the forehead or on the ribs, and if it has descended over its feet, then put the instrument in one of these places that we have said, until the thing is empty; and this is the shape of the instrument:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then flip the other side, where you have skill, so that the extraction is even; and then place it evenly by moving from one side to the other, to make it come out, and let the teeth hold, as in this form:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if a part remains, use some of its own oil, and push it into that part, and pull out the other part; and if none remains, put this tooth or more on top of the shoulder, and do this as much as it comes out completely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes in front of the other, and it cannot be brought back by tightening, then you must wrap it around the bandage until it comes out completely; then put it in the joint of the foot or on the ankle, and so you should do in the other hand, and on both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the question is about a child who is large and has a narrow outlet, or if the head is very high, it is necessary to use the spatula with spines between your fingers, and straighten the head; or you can use the instrument called «almidach», which comes with the tools of the chapter that follows this one; and do the same for a child with a large natural head; then remove the bones with pliers, and if the question is about a fracture, hold it firmly until the blood stops flowing; and if the blood cannot be stopped, cut pieces of cloth to plug the wound; and if the child is swollen in the belly or on the sides, it is necessary to pierce it until the blood flows.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the infant is lying on its feet, then light traction and gentle pressure to the marsh of the mouth are appropriate.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if the infant is lying on its back or belly, it is appropriate to gently pull the blanket wrapped around it; and when the stomach or belly is opened, remove all the moisture until there is none left; and if the other limbs are also frozen, and the patient remains unconscious, then apply warmth to the mouth from the marsh, and draw it towards the mouth; then apply I or II, and pull it out; and if the mouth is retracted due to an abscess that has formed, do not force it, but instead treat things that are moist and greasy; and apply ointments, and use astringent, moistening, and softening agents.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the shoulder is dislocated above its joint, and you can put it back in place, follow what we have said about the living child; and if there is no means to do so, then try to realign it by pieces, and leave nothing of the second part.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, follow what we have said about abscesses that come in the marsh; and if blood comes out, it should be immediately stopped with tight bandaging, and other treatments should be followed.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	I saw a woman in whose womb an infant had died, then consulted the other about it, and refused to let the others die.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, some abscesses appeared in the throat, and they swelled so much that they burst, and began to cause great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I went to the doctor, and he thought for a long time, and could not close the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I placed strong adhesive on it, and some bones stuck to it, and after some time, others did as well.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was very surprised because the belly does not have any bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I saw the wound, and in it were many bones, until the woman was much better; and I saw the woman in such a way for a long time, and it remained a little blood in the wound; and I did not remember this chapter except because when the masters find an unusual thing, they know how to provide help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	bring the marsh back to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	Here comes the second form of pressure, where we apply books; and to the second question of the second joints.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	Indeed, the corners should be more subtle than the restrictor, and made of flat or boxwood; and the mouth of the fist should be two inches wide, and the edge of the trees one palm and a half long; and between the two joints should be two additional wedges of this same wood, which are firmly inserted into each other, half a palm or a little more in length; and these two wedges are placed in the mouth of the marsh to open when turning the two corners.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, with a more subtle and lighter appearance, should be made of flat iron or boxwood, according to the appearance of pliers; and it should have two prongs, as you see, one palm long, and two wide; and when you want to open the mouth all at once, place the woman on the bed, the feet together and the legs apart, then push the two prongs together into the mouth, and hold the chief of the instrument between her teeth; then work your hand with the instrument equally, according to the quantity you want to open the mouth of the woman, until the bone does what it wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	This instrument is always above them, and there are many of their kinds; and when the eyes have them arranged, the more hasty the work, and the higher for people in quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not disregard this instrument because its need is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the second instrument is held back from childbirth, it is necessary to command the pain to hold its womb, and then make it expel the condition, and hold your hands on the mouth and nose; and if she sneezes through that, well done.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If not, if she has the pot, and make a steam or cover, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the marsh, such as rue, anise, chamomile, cassia, and centaury; all these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked or boiled over the fire; then put one pot or steam in the mouth of the marsh, and the other at the top of the mouth, and let her sweat until the vapor goes inside the mouth; then make her sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second joint moves out of place.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if it remains in place after this treatment and is not too tight, command the patient to massage their right hand with oil of sesame or mustard plaster, and then apply it naturally, and find the second joint; and when they have found it, grasp it and extend it gently and gradually, so that the tendon does not tear during extraction; but move it slightly to the right and left, and then remove it; if it comes out and disappears.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the marrow of the bone is already thin, we have said the treatment of expectoration and fumigation of herbs; and if none of these things are present, then do not try to pull it out; but it is better that what is at the marrow of the bone, that you tie it to the woman's wrist, then counter-irritate with a tetrapharmacon ointment; so it will heal and be strong; but nevertheless, when it does come out, there comes bad smell to the stomach and head, and causes pain.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	If it is necessary, then use these concoctions for the nose: none of the ancients have experienced the fumigation of celery and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument used for fumigation in women with retention of menses and the secondine is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it is similar to a needle, and one puts the tip subtly into the natural passage, and the others wide above the fire; and let the fumigation be over the coals, and the tine until it is burned out, and then start another one.
de percier lou fondement	of piercing the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born who have not pierced the foundation, but rather it has been stopped by some subtle swelling: therefore, if necessary, one must first pierce that swelling at its proper place, and not pierce the space aguishly, and stitch the wound so that it does not touch it; then put on a moistened cloth with wine and oil, then the treatment of ointment until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not reset, place a splint on the joint and let it rest for some time, and it should be stiff as the child wants to go into the chambers.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And never does a swelling of pus from a wound or an abscess come; if it comes, cover the wound: if it is treated, as we have said of the splint.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the deep fistula
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that come from outside the foundation are nodular and thicker than those that come above the foundation or in the space between the two parts, if there is one fistula or more; and when that nodule is old, it works, and becomes moist with white or subtle pus, and never are these fistulas permanent; and they are known by the fact that there is egestion or ventosity when the pain makes egestion, and perhaps some verses.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that perforate the bladder, and perforate half of the penis; and they reach the joint of the thigh, and perforate the buttocks.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus one knows the fistula passing through the basement, and not passing: and it is that you should bore your finger or basement, and insert a thin needle of silver or iron into the fistula when there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if it has twisting, if you bore a thin tent of lead, or horsehair, until you feel the tent or hair at your finger; and if you do not feel it, and there is no purulence, edema, or vermin, as we have said: save that it does not perforate further; then hurry to cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is persistent near the bladder or near a urethral conduit, if it allows urine to pass, and cannot be healed by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is perforated near the hip joint, then the tendon is close to the bone; if there is no twisting and the pain is internal, then it is already in place, and there is no cure by medicine or by cauterization; and in these persistent fistulas, there is no other cure than labor, and the vanity of those who attempt them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In the one that is not persistent and not ancient, in hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the pains are hidden between your hands on its back; and the legs are raised up to its knees, and its knees are bent towards its belly; then boil a tent of lead, or of pitch if there is twisting, until you remove the tent.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the pain is felt around the base, then you should insert your index finger, feeling as if it has pierced through; and either uncover or feel between your thumb and the syphilitic ulcer or the char, then cut away what is persistent; since there is no need to struggle if it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	It is possible to heal some, but this rarely occurs; and the aid that is made, if it is to heat the subtle cauterizer according to the width of the fistula, as it has been said before; and to insert it all at once into the fistula, until it reaches beyond the base; and do this twice or three times, until you know that these chars have been removed, which are similar to an arrowhead; then the cure of wounds is applied with burdock, until those chars have come out, then the cure of ointment is applied, applying char and sealing.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If it is thus healthy, it is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If it is not thus healthy, then nothing else can be healthy; and if the tendon attempts to tear, and does not perforate just where it is based, and between your thumb and the tent a thick covering of char or syfac, and you see the fistula at which the covering stops; if the copper begins at the beginning of the fistula, and goes ahead of the tent, and then the cauterization after, until it comes to the top of the tent; and it will be delivered from the tendon, and closed; then wipe off those charred parts that seem like an eagle's quill, and none should remain.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if you cannot reduce it, and cut between you and the work, then cauterize with fire or medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For the fire cauterization assembles two things: to know, the burning of these charred chars, and the stoppage of blood and the scabbing of moisture; then cure tents boiled in butter or in broken chocolate, as long as the wounds gush blood, and is the chars burned in the wound; then cure the wound of sore throats by pouring durable charcoal, and are the medicines dried.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if the fistula comes from just above the base, and is far from the body, then press on the top or base, and examine it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the tent, and between them is the thread or the skin or charcoal, where it is about to perforate, if there are no other remedies except hope and faith, by the administration of one of the three methods: either you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it just above the base, or if you can put tents and cure it as we have said; and do not go too far in front, so that you do not cover the foundation that holds the base, and bring the excretions out through the way of volition; then cure it as we have said; perhaps it will be healed, or you remove that covering and clean it as soon as it is cut below the base, or by tent or other instrument appointed; then clean the charred part that is in the wound, as much as you can; then try to restore the wound, and to keep the fistula in the part before the base: if there is a lighter thing to the pain.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And sometimes fistulas are made in this way: and when you push the tent into the fistula, it is where it costs at the base of the skin above the flesh, then take a tent perforated at the head according to this form:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And push the thread into the fistula, and push the tent along the entire thread in the fistula until it reaches the top.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is not successful at the base of the foundation inside, then pull out the thread of that one, so that you push your other or base; and take the head of the thread, and assemble the two pieces together, and hold them against each other, and leave it for a day or two; and do not hold them once, until the thread covers these charcoals that are between the two, and heal; then cure the wound until it is healed and healthy.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not perforate, then perforate it in all ways that you can, unless it is too much in front.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it does not suit to place the bandage too much in front, and then treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The form of the spiny spinous bone that is made into the fistula is very sharp and one-sided; on the other hand, not, because we do not know what we should not know, as you see here.
des emorroydes	Des swellings
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Swellings are according to two ways: either they are inside the foundation, like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and some have blood, and others have a little bit of urine, or a little bit of blood, and they have the color of the skin; and the treatment of those that are inside the foundation is that you command the patient to sweat so he can move in other rooms, as long as the foundation is not wet, and the child opens; if you hurry, and then pull them out with pincers, or hold them with your nail, then cover their roots; and if the tendons cannot hold them because of their moisture, take them to a cloth, or to a linen cloth, or to a piece of cloth; and stretch them to both sides, then cover them, and powder with some hot powders that are in the cauterizing chapter, or cauterize them as it is said in the chapter of cauterizing, and treat them with other treatments until they are healed; and if the foundation cannot come out, use a dressing made of mustard and aspergillum to clean what is inside the foundation, so that it can come out openly; and if the swellings are painful, and the child is strong from the foundation, then the treatment is light; and it is that you pull them with your nail or pincers, and cover them, then treat them as we have said, until they are healed, and do not fear the incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary to suture the wound in this manner: take a thread of twisted wool, and make an awl with it, then draw the thread through the eye of the needle from the other side, and pierce the needle from the other part, and pull the two ends of the thread out of the needle, and if it is too wide; then straighten the thread formally, then untie the thread, and pull out the needle, and do so with all the others, and leave one to let the excess blood out; then put on the bottom of the wound a piece of linen cloth dipped in rose oil or cerus, and put it on the bottom, and command the patient to rest; then let him rest until they are healed, and when they are healed, treat them with ointment and other treatment until they are healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	dryly and firmly at the base
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	often there is dryness at the base of the intestines, and due to constriction of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary to reset the bone at the point of a spatula or at your angle, which does not let it moisten; then cure it as it should be while it is dry; and if it cannot be cured, then begin the razor stronger than before until it is healed, and then it should be scraped; then cure it as it should be while it is healed.
dou fremit	high fever
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Fever is a small appearance that is deformed before the body, and it goes up to the head; and sometimes the fever returns, and one feels as if dead from fever, and it comes throughout the body, and more so in the hands than in other parts.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the cure is that you take a quill from a goose pen, or a strong vulture quill, and place that quill on the fever, so that the circles of the fever encircle the fever all around; then turn your hand to the entire quill until you cover the fever all around, and put it in front, and extract the fever from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	If you see, do this as if it were a thunderbolt or an iron bar of this form, and be subtle in removing and drawing up:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	do not make a mistake, to hold the point and press it; and if you see, cauterize the heat, as it is in front or the chapter of the cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of this form of the clister
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	No one ever made a clister of silver or copper, or iron melted or sharp; and no one ever made these instruments small and large, according to those with which they were familiar.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Therefore, those who are to be treated for children and the weak and painful, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of this belt is small and large if it is above wide, or the belly is tied according to this method:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and there should be a disadvantage where the belly is tied, as you see, and the threads are inside perforated; and on one side there should be II holes, and on the other I; and the belly should have medicines from a beast's bladder or parchment, and it should be perforated all around with small holes, and between each hole there should be one inch of space, then bolt in these holes X or Y threads crisscross, and tie the belly as if it were a goat; and when the medicine is inside, if the thread is to the instrument before one strong thread, then close; and this is the form of the circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and oil the head of the poultice with oil or a similar substance, then squeeze it out and apply it to both hands together until all the soreness is gone, then remove the poultice and lift the patient's legs to the side, and if the medicine wants to come out, let it come out as much as possible; and if he sleeps a whole night, it is greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you apply the poultice for a disease of intestinal discharge, and the medicine wants to come out, restart it as long as it is healthy.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the thorn is embedded in the base or in an abscess, it should be removed as delicately as for a child; and this is the form of the delicate removal with the skin being stretched over it:
des plaies	with wounds:
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have said in the division the treatment of wounds; now we will tell you about the treatment of hands and medicine, according to completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are different according to what they are made of, and according to the places or wounds that are made, and for what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things by which wounds are made are by piercing with a dart, and cutting of spear or dagger, or of lance or staff or arrow, or similar things; or those that are made according to the places of the body, such as a wound that goes through the neck, or the head, or the foot, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members; and I will tell you the treatment of each wound, and I will begin with simple wounds of the head, because its chapter comes first.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes or the bone is not broken, take care if it is an insertion of an arrow or similar things, and the skin is completely torn and the wound is large, and you doubt lightly of an abscess: if you do this immediately cleanse the wound itself if there is little blood from the wound, and cleanse the opposite part; and avoid the evils of overeating and heavy foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he does not want to cleanse, let him eat light food, and do not drink wine, and do not change his diet; and put on the wound, if an abscess comes, cotton moistened in rose oil alone, or in sterile wine; and if there is no abscess, put on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not moved by air, powder that I will say a little later; and if the wound has been moved, put on some ointments until it is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large, like that of a tailor's awl and similar, and the lips cannot come together by themselves, then sew them together, as I will say in the treatment of belly wounds, from the stitching.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is exposed to bone, and can be moved but does not hold but only at a point, then cover it with a bandage; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin, and command the patient to eat soft foods, such as tests and cooked grain, like chickens, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you have leather or purulence that does not touch the bone, then cover it all with the purulence, and pour in strong wine, then treat it; and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, without cutting, and it cannot be stopped by medicines, then tie the artery, and if you have leather that dislodges, then tie it with a thread; and if this does not help, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and you should put in this powder that soothes as soon as the wound has moved.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the method of the powder is as follows: take incense one part; dragon's blood two parts; fresh chalk three parts, and the powder finely, and fill the wound, and bandage it tightly, until it heals well and joins all its tissue; then tie it securely, and leave it undisturbed, unless it swells; for one should not remove the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	One should never use chalk alone, when one does not have incense or dragon's blood, but only when the wound has moved.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the limb has moved the wound, immediately after, do not put any of this powder; but put on some ointments digested, or arrowroot flour made with honey and egg, as long as it is damp; then treat with other treatments until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if a small bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with fine forceps; and I will tell you about the main fractures afterwards.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between this and the main fracture, but if the neck nerves or the artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is a bone, there is no other method than to let the care, and not put anything restricting, because it hurts bones and makes them recede; and do not put anything sharp on the wound, for the substance of bones is cold, and the continuation of such things is with the brain, which is one of the highest members; but let the medicine be soft, like chalz washed in warm sweet water, and mixed with rose oil, and the linen washed in warm sweet water, and other stones of this manner, and gently moist.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then bind it with a broad bandage, and treat it until it heals.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and the bone is shaved and filled with pus, then pierce or below the bone; and if the artery is cut, and blood flows, then remove it, and bandage, and cauterize as appropriate; and if the spine of the neck is cut, or the veins, and the conductor is preserved, by which the flesh goes, if the spine above the neck bone, and do not touch the neck but return it according to its natural shape; then gradually tighten, and leave for some time, then treat the wounds until they are healed; and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then remove it; and if there are pieces of bone, then remove them all if you can, and those that you cannot, leave until the wound heals, and is aligned and cleaned. And if the wound is fresh, then powder with the powder that I have said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if he has bone in the wound and there is a fistula, then treat it as I have described in his chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound from arrow or sword
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a wound from arrow or sword, and the wound is deep, look to see if the hairs on the wound are growing ventilated: cut away that the wound is mortal; and if it is not deep, and it is fresh all over blood, do not put powder in the first hour for the blood that it does not stick together, and return to the heart, and cure the pain; but put attractive ointment, and tie it twice a day; and if you have no ointment, put old cotton in the wound to draw out the moisture, and let it rest for three hours, or four, or more; then there will be no spasm, nor tremor of the heart from elsewhere; and when you see the good dispositions, cut away that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Cure the wounds of tents and other wounds, until they are healed; and if they cannot be healed, and work, then make incisions as there may have been fistulas; thus cure as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from an arrow or sword, and it is simple, or deeper, or at the back, then cure as one should for what is in front; if it is large, stitch; and if it is small, powder, and if it has penetrated into the bone, and has broken pieces, then apply to the wound, and remove the foreign bodies if they are desired; and if they are not desired, let the wound rot, it will lessen the extractions; and for other wounds in other members, judge as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	belly rupture
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	The rupture of the belly is great and common and small; from the great wound, once the intestines or the nerves of the intestines escape, by which the insertion of them occurs; and the wound is more painful, and often the small wound is worse than the large one, because it is easier to put the intestines back in if they are not put back in at once; for the intestines swell quickly when they feel the cold, if they are put back in gently, and because the middle wound is worth more, because it is easier to sew up the intestines to their place as with other wounds. And I will say one by one and explain each of the four ways in which the rupture of the belly occurs: the two common costures are in the costure of the belly, and the costure of other wounds of the body, and two other particular costures are common to other wounds; and all the same, they are more particular with the costure of the belly, and I will say one by one and explain each.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small, and nothing of the inside is injured, and it is easy to set, then it is done in one of two ways: either by the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen by the heat.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is hot, warm it in this way: moisten a sponge or a handful of dry salt alone, or cook in boiling water and cider vinegar and spike; and heat the intestine until it swells is softened; and never do this restraining, and it is better to let it cool slowly.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling separate, if the intestine is moist or alkaline and the wounds are cooked, for this is aligned with the entry of a little thing; and if it cannot enter, make a small incision in the instrument used to remove tartar; and the first cure is to stop bleeding, which we should not cut without great necessity, and this is the instrument for cutting: if you cut from inside the beak and outside, and cut the shape.
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine jumps out, put it back in its natural shape according to its own proper place, if you can, for this is useful.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is wide, and it is in the part away from the belly, it is necessary that you make the patient lie on their back, and put their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the part away from the belly, put the head and the worst part higher than the other parts, and thus manage as I said for large and medium-sized wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	For small wounds, apply what is appropriate, then put between your hands the painful remedy that covers the entire wound at its hand, and brings together the lips; and this is the common way of stitching, and it is that you hold a needle or several, depending on the quantity of the wound's size, leaving one inch of the wound's head to two, and then insert a needle with good strong thread; and pierce the two skins with the two skin-needles, which are outside the skin from inside, as far as you make the wound pierced from that part, and bring together the two skin-needles four together; then wind the doubled thread around the needle on both sides, and then bring together the wound's edges evenly, leaving one inch, and then insert another needle; and tie the thread as you did with the first needle, and do not stop doing this according to what you have with the needles, until the whole wound is closed; and let the needles be medium, between thin and thick, because the thin needles cover the entire skin, and the too thick ones cannot enter well: for this reason they should be medium; and do not put the needles too far from the skin and the flesh, so that they do not cut and open the wound before the sewing; and then cover the edges of the needles, so that they do not bleed the wound at night, and put tents or cloths on the edges of the needles to hold them, and leave them until the wound is sewn; and this way of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because it requires one needle or two to second stitching, and it is that you bring together the skin-needles and the skin-needles together with a needle that has good strong thread; and when you have pierced these edges all four together, then bend the needle to the part where you started, in the way of sewing, and leave one inch between each stitch; this stitch is the man, and I sewed a wound that someone had in the belly, which was torn by a knife, and the wound was more than one inch wide, and it was out of the intestines by two inches wide, and the wound was inside the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I brought back the intestine after it had been out for 24 hours, and the wound was dressed with ointment after 15 hours, and it was treated, and it healed.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And the mother thought he would die, and it was a miracle; and I did not treat him with any ointment, for I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicine; and I changed the dressing on the wound twice a day with old cotton, and washed it with honey water until he healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	I will now tell you the two main ways of sewing: take the needle and the thread from the inside of the part in front of it; when it has pierced the curved part on the right, then the head of the suture or the stitch where you inserted the needle, and pierce it again from another part of the inside of the part in front of it; and the understanding of this sewing is that you sew as the furriers make the furs, and leave one end of the suture once, and then take it from another part, until the sewing is all completed.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second method of sewing, which Galen properly calls, is such that anyone can do, who assembles the two parts together naturally, and applies one of the main needles to the other head, in a similar way: stick an needle or main needle close to the part to be sewn, and make it pierce only that part alone, and leave the two needles of the syfac; then turn the needle, and make it pierce from the front part downwards through the middle, the two needles of the syfac; then pierce both from the front part downwards through the middle, in two other needles that are on the other side; and this is the easiest method of sewing and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	For those who say this, and no one testifies to it, that the stomach should be sewn with two needles, or one in each; and one should be put on one side, and the other on the other, in the manner of those who embroider corroies; and sutures that when the tear is in the stomach, it is more painful than other stitches of the stomach.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgments of the wound are such as the judgments of other wounds: and it is that when you cut the fresh wound to all its blood, provided the doctor has moved it, then put back the intestine, and the cloth; then put on powder mixed with charcoal, and if the doctor has moved it, then put on any ointment that is present, until the wound closes; and bind the bandage, and sound the sifac, and the mirach; then treat the wound as the others, until it is healed; and if you do not have medicines, then as soon as it begins to bleed, cotton, and move it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you have no other medical treatment in many positions where the wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound does not make communication with principal members, then it is necessary to apply a light oil of temperate warmth, or rose oil, and place it around the wounds, and separate the bones; and if it feels pain or putrefaction in the belly, and often happens, then clysterize with black wine, and immediately if the putrefaction comes to the intestines; and perforate within, and scrape what is inside, the large intestines being lighter to heal than the small.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine called "jeun" cannot heal when it is raw, because of the thinness of its veins that are in it, and due to the subtlety of the whole body, and its proximity to nerve nature.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the gut jumps out of the wound, put it back in as the intestine, while it is fresh; and if it is old and turned black, you must tie the part that is black, for blood vessels do not come into it, because it has veins and arteries; then cover what is between the limb, and hang the two ends down from the side of the wound towards the back to straighten the extraction when the gut falls, and the wound closes.
de la routure dou boueil	of the tearing of boiled bread
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is rent, and the wound is small, if it can be restored to some men, for I saw that one man was pierced through the belly by a lance; and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and became an ulcer, and in it were excretions and foulness; I put care according to what I knew, and did not cease to carefully treat it until it was healed, and the men recovered.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw it being sewn up, I doubted that the hairs were not in his intestine; and there was no harm, but he remained in better conditions, and eating and drinking; and some experimenters said that when one has a small wound in the intestine, one should be bound in such a way: take a large needle, then gather the lips of the wound, and when the needle is over the mouth, so it holds the mouth above; then cover the test with the other needle, and hold it so that it cannot slip, then put the other needle again in that way until the wound is completely closed.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	If the shoulder joint catches fire inside, and no harm comes to the patient, and it can be tied with a thin thread that is taken from the intestine of an animal, in such a way: take the end of this intestine thread that is very dirty, and then tie it to the end of this thin silk thread, then pull the thread through the needle, and sew the intestine, and roll it into the wound; and this method of sewing is no more than according to the way of faith and hope; and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the intestines, there is no skill or health, only thinness.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a fistula or that she is
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	that every wound or abscess, when it is covered over, is universally called "fistula", and specifically when it is cut open and healed.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And a fistula is according to its hardness and whiteness, where no pain is felt, and it is cut open like the quill of an eye; and sometimes it is clear and sometimes deep; sometimes small and sometimes enough; and I have spoken about it in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and there is no char, except by one of the EIGHT causes: namely, by the smallness of the blood or flesh; or by its evil nature; or because there is a hard char inside and on the lips, which does not allow new char to grow; or there is too much blood; or the wounds are poor, and the matter is of bad quality; or the medicine is not good in the cure; or because the corruption is like pestilence; or because the property in the region is late in digestion, and late in health, and flows by nature; or there are veins or bones: and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	It is necessary for me to tell you about the treatment of fistulas that is done by handwork.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Fistulas can occur in all parts of the body; for there are fistulas that come to large veins, and to arteries, and to nerves, or to the face, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to any of the costal bones, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet; and if they come to the property of the principal member, and similar things.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	All fistulas of this kind are a difficult cure, and there is only labor and ignorance; and if there is any fistula that does not come from the joint that I have said, and you have confidence in the cure, and you know how to treat it, take a tin or iron needle, if the fistula is straight, if the quill; and if the fistula is crooked, take a thin tin of plunger, because the plungers penetrate around the crookedness; and if the fistula has many holes and you cannot well sew it by tents, then cauterize one of the holes, for the moisture goes from one hole to another, and cleanses it; then treat it carefully to your power, that you know whether there is bone or nerve, and if it is cut in front, and ask the patient well about the pain he feels when you press with your hand, and where he feels it; and when you will know truly where it is, and whether it is far from joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, if it is according to what I have told you, and remove the cause and the rotten parts that are inside; and then treat it until it is healed, and if the fistula is deeply placed in the right place, then cut it open as much as you can, then put soft tents of medicine, and push them up to the head of the fistule, until the medicine corrodes the superfluity that remains at the bottom; and then put clean ointment on a clean cloth, until it is healed; and if it is not healed by this, then cauterize as we have said, and if the bone is rotten from the fistule, then cut.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If the vein or nerves do not cause you pain or harm your main limbs, as we have said; and if the tooth is exposed, and there is corruption and blackness, then clean the corruption until it is completely removed, then treat the things inside as much as possible until they are healed; and if they are not healed, and remain as before, then you must remove them as before: if it exposes and wants to come out as much as possible, and remove all the corruption, then restore the tooth; and if it is thus healed, it is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If not, then it is too deeply rooted, and you cannot reach it; if there is no other means than patience; and if there is a small rotten bone, and you can pull it out with pliers, then extract it with the suitable tool, and if there are many bones, then remove them all, and do not leave any behind; and if the moisture makes it against you, and there is no error or fear, then use heat and moisture and char, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	If you cannot remove them within an hour, apply something soothing to the wound, and leave it until the bone is surrounded by flesh, and then they will be more easily broken; and if it is a large bone, such as a leg or thigh, raise the corruption as far as the bone is not entirely ossified, then reopen the wound; and if there is a great part of the corruption coming from the bone; if it should be covered and covered with what comes from the bone, and then treat it until it is sound; and I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you may take example and help in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	The young man was around 30 years old, who had pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the chest, so that the matters came to the leg, and he was inflamed by a large abscess, and there was no cause to open; but the doctor opened it too high, and they drained a lot of matter, and it became a fistula, and many people were sick with the body and moisture from the chest; and many doctors treated him within two years, and there was no healing in the art of hands, until I was called, and I saw his leg and the medicines that they used to treat it, and what was going through the pores to the great chest; and his chest became red like a lemon.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I pitched a tent in one of these gaps, and then I searched all the gaps, and found that one was coming towards the other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I then stayed there, and took out in one of the gaps until I discovered a part of the bone, and found it rotten and perforated, and the corruption was coming to the bone from inside; I saw that the rotten bone appeared to me, and I thought that there was no other corruption except what I had seen; and I began to treat the wound with various medicines for a long time, but could not heal it; then I started again, and discovered the bone as before, and found the continuous corruption in the bone, and saw it, and then I took it out, and I felt pain in the limb; but I could not take it all out, so I took around a palm of the bone, and treated it completely, then I put medicines back on; it became healthy and healed quickly, but it did not want to start again except for the weakness of the pain, which could not bear, and for the fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For the evacuation of blood often occurred, but he was completely cured, and in place of the bone grew a hard cartilage, and it was of good disposition and had no harm or contrary effect throughout, neither at first nor later.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be done in this way: take a thin linen cloth, and stretch it at the head of the bone that opens, and command that it not extend upwards; and put another thicker linen strip above the first one, and tie it over the cartilage that is on top of the bone, and stretch the head, so that you can remove the corrupted cartilage from outside, and reveal the cartilage over the part where you want to be, that it does not stick to the cartilage; and put a poultice or a cloth of something else beside the bone to cover the corrupted cartilage; and it should be done so that one can see and feel the corruption, and it should be done again another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	If the tooth is rotted, and not opened, and the rot is in the middle or in one part, then remove the entire tooth; then put the thread on the other side of the corruption, and sew from one part to the other the corruption, and let the thread be as long as possible, as we have said; and if the rot is in the joint, then copper the corrupted joint, and sew the bone or what it contains from the other side; and if the rot is in the continuation of the two joints, then there is no other way than to cover it; and if the rot is at the fingertip, or at the tip of the toe, then this thing is very difficult, but nevertheless you should inquire about this corrosion, how it opens; and clean it in all ways that you can, but do not let the vein or nerve do the opposite; and know that the tools for covering these bones are many, according to the shape of the bones and the appearance of teeth, and their size and subtlety, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness; and therefore you should prepare a tool for each similar work of craftsmanship; and know that the work will show you the tool that you will have to use, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of diseases; so consider the tool that you have according to what it should be.
dou feu	for the fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The joints will become deformed or due to the lack of, or due to the absence; and when you have medicine for that corrosion by the cure of medicines, and it does not help, then you must cover that member up to the joint where the corrosion comes from, so that the pain escapes by the means of death, or by malice, which is greater, due to the lack of the member; and the signs are that the members become black, so that it seems as if it were burned by fire, and afterwards becomes darker, then those corrosions of member after member take hold of the whole body; if you hurry to cover, and if it is due to the sting of some poisonous animals, such as scorpions of the sea and vipers and similar, if the corrosion is at the head of the joint, then cover it, and do not give them any space to come to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And if it comes out of the hand, if the cope is at the joint, so that the corrosion does not come out to the arm; and if it comes to the arm, if the cope at the shoulder; and if it passes the shoulder, it is death, and there is no other remedy except the quantity of its virtue; and thus do all as the corrosion comes or pierces: if it comes in the first joint, if the cope after the other joint; and if it comes to the pierce, if the cope all the pierce; and if it goes up the leg, if the cope at the knee joint; and if it comes above the knee, there is no other means than that the limb is dead; and the way of the copper or the cloth to bandage the member is that you tie it above and below, and place some bandages on one side, and others on the other side, and cut the flesh between the two sides at a span wide, until the bone is exposed; then the copper or cloth, and put some linen from each part so that the wound does not touch the healthy skin, and comes to the other injury and abscess.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	If blood flows when you are working and cutting, cauterize the wound quickly with a hot iron, or apply some powders that stop bleeding; then continue your treatment until it is completed, then bind the injured limb with a bandage, and treat it until it is healed; and I will tell you what happened to a man in his foot: he had a black spot that seemed like burning by fire, and that corrosion first appeared on his sole of the foot, taking over the whole foot; and when the doctor saw the corrosion, he covered the foot, and it was healed; but after a long time, the corrosion appeared again on the second toe, and it came to me, and I applied some repercussive things after washing the body, and could not stop the corrosions; and he thought that I would cut off his toe, and he did not want, because he had no hope of being cured; and he despaird completely, and returned to his land, and covered his toe, and it was healed; and I have not told you anything else except for the reason why others do this, if they have a need.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	Never comes abscess in the joint, and it stays so long that it causes great swelling; then they burst and pierce, and in their bursting, the skin remains like a bag; and the skin above is also as thin as cloth, and does not stick to the bone, nor to the nerve, and such diseases are called "sinus", and are not called "fistula"; but if it is so long that it reaches the bone from both sides, it is called "fistula"; and the skin is that you cover that skin all around, and especially when it is thin, like cloth; and does not rot for its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if you have sworn that the skin has hardened, and corruption is not yet present, and the skin is charred, then the following cure should be used: check if the breasts are large, and the nipples have a foul odor, then use an Egyptian plaster made as follows: take equal amounts of aloe, oil, and licorice, cook them together in a small vessel over the fire until the medicine turns red and thickens like honey; then apply it to the breasts, bandage them tightly, and leave it for two hours, then remove it by sprinkling; do this many times until the breasts are clean and soft; and if the patient cannot bear the pain or the Egyptian plaster and water made of ashes do not help, then use a plaster of honey and wine with a little licorice powder; or use a plaster of honey and melted wine, which has the property of cleaning and washing, and the wine makes the flesh sore; and when you have done this, and you are sure that the breasts are clean, then apply a definitive plaster made with rose oil and wine; or use some medicines and ointments, as I have mentioned their properties for treating wounds; and if the nipple is too small, and the plaster cannot enter, then enlarge it with a small iron, and put in a tent of Egyptian ointment or basilicon, until it is large enough to enter; and if the wound is too large, then cover it with a cloth or bandage where the plaster or the breast can enter, and if the nipple that is above is too high, then place it below where it can enter.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	When the bone is fractured, do not let it hang down; and if you cannot cover the wound as you see fit, arrange it in such a way that the bone corre to the lowest part that is there, for when the bone is fractured, do not let it hang down; and if you cannot cover the wound as you see fit, arrange it in this way: that the bone slides smoothly downwards, and leave nothing of the bone; and take consolidative medicines to put on the wound, and place it on the linen cloth that covers all the wound; then cover the forces at the end of the wound a little more than the first, since they are tightly bound to the other cloth according to the quantity of the wound, and place it on the wound to straighten the bone, and do not remove the large cloth until after many days one time; and whoever is on the wound above the bone often removes to straighten the bone, and see what comes from the wound, whether it is poison or little or much, or digested, or undigested; and take precaution if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been extended in this way and you see the nature that it rises over the wound, then remove the bandage and approach health; and then remove the dressing in the morning, or the next day, and when you remove the wound, change the other cloth, and renew the bandaging.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if his breast becomes swollen and undigested after many hours, tear that the breast does not become misshapen.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons are cut after long tension, do not despair of health, for health approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are men who take long in healing their wounds, and those who do the opposite; and if his breast becomes swollen and undigested after many hours, tear that the breast does not become misshapen; and if his breast delays in hardening, and is distant, then apply medicines of moist substance but dry in virtue, such as oil of rosemary, and the decoction of old wine equal in substance; then cook and use it; and the same thing is done with honey growing thick, when there is no presence of oil of rosemary, or you take wormwood and aloe, and incense, and grind it, and the powder on the honey when it is on the fire; and then apply it to a cloth, and place it on the breast, and never administer a physician long, and roots of celestial lily, which is also like flour of wheat and centaury; and use simple or compound: grind them, and make powder, and put on the honey that I have said, and use it; and if the cure is long, and is not cured by this cure, then tear that the corruption is removed, and makes an impression in the bone, or in hard members, or in limbs; so the cure of the cure of fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the elbow
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Panarice is an abscess that arises from the elbow joint, or the wrist, or by chance it arises in other places; and when it is opened, and no care is taken, if the abscess comes to the elbow, and corrodes and pours out blood until it reaches the root of the elbow, and perhaps corrodes the whole of it; and there come corrosions just up to the bone, until it causes intense pain, and is the cause of the patient's large swelling, and is of a red color.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help much, then you must cut away all the superfluity that remains in the elbow, then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cauterization is a great help if the bones are healthy and the joint is sound; and if the joint is close to the skin, and begins to prick and swell, then it is necessary to remove the skin from the joint that does not touch the bone, and put the bottom up, and gently and carefully cover this bone with medicines that are burning and corrosive to remove everything; then treat the wound until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corrosion is in the bone, then cover it and drain it, for as much as the bone is corrupted and cannot heal; and if you see the other corrupting, then cover it with a new bandage as described above, then treat the wound until it is healed; and if it is ferocious, and bleeding, and causing great pain, then first cleanse it; then cover the joint with a thin layer of acute honey by cutting across, and make sure that the cut does not come near the skin that is outside the joint, for the hairs would cause too much pain; and if it happens, then put something on top to relieve it.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain of a sore hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The pain of a sore hand is often caused by the bones of some men's hands being crooked, and sometimes at the place where they have bones, and sometimes in an angle, and never in the root of the joint, or in any of the fingers.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Those who do not move in any of the fingers do not move, and those who move at the joint of the finger, perhaps move; the length of the one that is crooked is light, in this way: cut it at its root with a wide spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Those who are born in the root of the joint are difficult to cure: if you hold the copper.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In those who are born or must lie on their backs, it is necessary to first cut around the round bone properly to the bone, then cut the bone to a suitable size for the patient, and then care for them until they are healed.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The same that comes together in two ways comes by birth or by the healing of a wound, or by burning with fire, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	If it is necessary to cut the wound that has come together, so that what should return to them according to their natural forms; then put between two tents or moistened cloths of rose oil, so that they do not heal; or you put between two thin pieces of plaster, as much as they should be healed, as it is necessary.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If it comes to either of its two sides with the back of the hand, then secure it as it should be.
des vils	For the poor
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	Veins are large and swollen with excess melancholy, which come in many members of the body; and more so in legs of those who walk and work and carry, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you should administer no purging of bile, and then the healthy one from the basilisk.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The cure of the iron is according to two methods: one is to hold it, and draw out the black blood; and the other method is that you let the vein bleed, and draw all the blood.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The tail is done in this way: first, the leg of a high, hot mutton, so much that the thick meat is not too subtle, then strain the leg with the bad side down from above the hindquarters; then cut the vein in the belly, or in II or III, of a wide tail, then relieve and pull out the black blood to your hand, from one to the other, until as much blood as the pain of the wound can suffer; and then bind it, and command him to soak in foods with black wine; and repeat the evacuation and cleaning when the veins are flat, and no longer hurt.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the limb is contracted, twisted, and swollen all together, and it is not straight as we have said, then you must tormentingly untwist it but do not cover it with anything; and treat it as we have previously mentioned.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The form of iron used to cover the limb if it is curved and does not cut into the vein; and it is of large size, because if it were thin, it would cut into the vein, but if it is large as we have said, then this is the form:
de la voinne civile	of the vein civil
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is inserted in the legs, in hot parts where there are no herbs or trees, and in land where there is no moisture; and by chance it arises elsewhere than in the legs, and if it has the pus that comes out of the skin, as it comes from within the flesh and bones, insert between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this wound are that a very large inflammation comes in the leg, then the limb changes, and the wound begins to issue forth, like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the wound is open, it is necessary to wrap around a piece of cloth of one and a half spans wide and long enough to cover the wound, and leave the cloth on the leg, and every time it is not present, if the wrapping is around the cloth, and the covering; and if it is too long, cut a part of it, and wrap the remaining part, and do not cover it at its root, until it is completely issued; for if you cover it, it will go back into the wound, and cause abscess and putrefaction in the limb, and bad disease; therefore it is necessary that it be treated little by little and slowly towards the head, and nothing remains or scars; and this wound never occurs when it is treated from the palms of the hand or fingers, and once it issued from the length of the hand or fingers, and when you cover it, if the pain or swelling increases, and pierce it from below, so that everything issues; and let the matter inside be removed, and administer medicines in ointments for putrefaction every day, then treat the wound as the abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And in this vein, never rain, and especially when it opens at the joint of the knee, or the ankle, and it is very painful, and from which it jumps back; therefore as we have said before, cure it thus.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	of verses that are born between leather and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called in our land "ox disease", because it often occurs in oxen, and it is a small worm that is born between leather and flesh, and goes through the entire body, passing from member to member, causing pain as it goes, until it reaches the skin where it came from, and jumps out; and it is caused by some humors, such as worms and lumbrics and tapeworms or intestinal worms; and one doubts its harm, because as it goes through the body, and it climbs to the head, and it comes to the brain, perhaps it enters, and destroys the brain; and this has happened many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see that the patient is being cured and drawn out, it is impossible to do otherwise than when he goes: therefore it is necessary to hold the limb above and away from a very tightly bound bandage, then cut through and remove it, and if the wound faces forward in the char, and you do not leave it, then cauterize with fire above, until it dies; and the greatest harm it does is that it corrupts the oil, as we have said; and if you see it coming or coming close to the oil, hold it away from it firmly, then cut through and remove it; and it is necessary to use the bandage of healing of the bodies of soluble medicines for the bad humors that are thrown out, and if there is swelling of the food, use enemas.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of pain that comes from joint movement
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is called in our land "gout", and it is a pain that comes to any limbs, and it moves from one member to another; and I will tell you what I know.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to a sick woman, and I discovered that one of her arms was swollen, and I saw a small blister in the vein of the arm; and soon after, I saw it rise as if a worm were in the shoulder, more quickly than anything, just like live silver when it cuts through flesh; the pain departed from that limb, and went into the shoulder, and then it spread throughout the body, until it came to the other arm; then she told me that she had turned inside out around the body, as I saw.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was greatly amazed at how it moved from one limb to another, for I had never seen this disease in this manner before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	Nevertheless, I had heard that it was common for pain to move from one limb to another, but I had never seen it as such in a woman; and I thought it was because the woman had a dry body, and her veins were exposed, and because that appearance of constraint seemed to appear more in those who were delicate, and who had moist bodies and covered veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see this disease and the pain feels as we have said, if it appears as such, then apply heat and cold quickly to the affected limb, and then cover it with a cloth until that constraint of the veins is released; and cauterize the limb; and if you do not see it at your eyes, then treat the cause of the vein constraint, such as fetid pills, and serapin pills, and similar others.
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are various, according to their resemblance and according to the parts of the body where they penetrate.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The variety of them is such that there are those with large points, and small ones, and barbed, and serrated; and those with two angles, and those with tails, and those with pieces; and the one that penetrates into any member, depending on its manner: whether in a principal member, such as the head, heart, liver, spleen, kidneys, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When it penetrates into any of these members, and the sign of death that I will tell you about afterwards appears: then you must extract this arrow, because many die after in various conditions; and when this bad sign does not appear, and the arrow is not completely removed, then remove it, and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	When the arrowhead enters the brain and pierces the skull, and the spinal fluid leaks out which is above the brain, it causes blindness and dizziness and vertigo and paralysis of the limbs, and inflammation and paralysis of the tongue, and spasms and confusion of mind, and vomiting of bile; and perhaps without strength in the nose or ears; and perhaps also the speech and voice; and a white discharge from the wound resembling pus, and also a discharge like blood; and if these signs appear to you, then take care of the patient and remove the arrow if it is not already out.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	When the arrowhead has entered the chest or abdomen, it is near the right breast, and it feels as if it were stuck in something hard and not soft; and perhaps the arrowhead moves like a chicken's foot, and there is black blood, and cold sweat, and syncope: then certainly the patient will die.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign that the arrow has not pierced the lung is that without any whey (scum) coming out of the wound, and the throat swells, and the limbs change color, and the patient breathes high and seeks the warmth.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrowhead is lodged in the covering of the worst place, it is behind the small ribs; and it pours out much blood and great pain and breathlessness; and they move all the member of the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrowhead is lodged in the stomach, by chance if it jumps from the wound anything of the undigested meat.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrowhead is lodged in the belly, and it does not pass through any part of the intestines, there is no hope in the cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrowhead is lodged in the bladder, and the urine passes out and comes out afterwards, and the pain is very great: cut off the wound as it is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limbs, such as the face and neck and throat and shoulder and back and spine and hips and knees, and similar limbs, are safe according to various positions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or the artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me, because you were doing something else.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to a man with an arrow that hit him in the knee joint: I tried to remove it, and pulled it out from the other side of the ear grease, and he was healed without any harm.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And from one of the jars, an arrowhead was taken that had pierced into the oil paper outside, and the arrowhead was returned, but it could only reach as far as the tip towards the back, and it was a large arrowhead of a Turkish style, all made of iron without ears; the jar was healed, and no harmful accidents came to it.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And from the neck of a Christian, an arrowhead was taken that had Arabic ears: I saw the barbs, and skillfully removed it so that I could take it, and the Christian was healed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And a arrow was stuck in a man, either in his head or stomach, and I thought he would die; and after he had passed thirty days, his condition did not change; I cut above the arrow, and pulled it out, and removed it, and there was no bad outcome.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you want to a man who had an arrow stuck in his back, and the wound was closed from above; and the arrow remained inside, and did not change his natural dispositions, nor found harm in any of his natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And if you want to another man who had an arrow stuck in his face, and the wound was closed; and he continued to suffer great pain; and many similar things.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And there was an arrow in the man of the prince, the king, which was stuck in his neck, and was slightly leaning towards the right side; and the arrow was completely buried in him for three days after it was stuck.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I felt it all with a thin probe, and did not feel anything; but he felt pain and pricking on his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was the tip of the arrow; I put above his head an ointment made from attractive and digestible ingredients, because the wounds were not inflamed; and I saw the tips of the arrows.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I applied the poultice immediately, and it soothed the wound directly, and it lasted for a long time, as long as he felt the arrow inside his nose; and he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I applied the corrosive medicine to the wound immediately, and I probed it, and felt the tip of the arrow sticking out of the flesh; then I poured more of the corrosive medicine into the opening of the wound until the tip of the arrow became visible. It healed well within four months, and then it started to discharge pus, so I removed the sutures on both sides, and I did not manage to extract it; therefore, I continued to subtly and cleverly manipulate instruments until I got a good pair of forceps, as described in this chapter, and I extracted the arrow and closed the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And the miracle worker judged that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored: I restored it then, and it was healed by the wound, and the injuries were completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	I have told you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you may place your trust in what I do not say, for books cannot understand everything; but wise masters know many great things, and what is present and lacking, they find nine works, and nine instruments, for the understanding of strange things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows do not come out of the members where they are stuck because of two methods: either by the way they enter, or from another part; and the one that jumps out through the way it enters, is an arrow that entered into its flesh, and it has never jumped out.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if she does not jump now, let her remain until the charcoal is poured around, and the issue is alleviated; and if she is stuck in the bone, and cannot be removed, let her remain thus for several days, and move her every day; and then she will jump, and if she does not jump, pierce all around with a subtle knife, until the bones around are expanded, and then remove it.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is stuck in the head bone, and goes towards one of the belly's ventricles, and any of the accidents that I have mentioned causes pain to the patient: do not remove it immediately, but let her remain thus for several days, because if the arrow goes towards the syphilitic face, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is not deeply embedded in the bone only, and does not come into contact with the face, and remains there for several days without any bad accident, then use the engine to draw it out.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is deeply embedded and cannot be drawn out, then apply tar around it as I have told you; then treat the limb until it is healed.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is embedded in the body where it cannot be seen, then remove it with any suitable instrument; and if you feel it, then remove it with any suitable instrument; and if you cannot because of the narrowness of the wound, and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein, then let the wound fester until it is large enough; and remove the arrow if you can, and if it has ears attached to it that hold it in place, then cut off the cartilage that is embedded deep in the muscle where you can, and then break or pry open the ears of the arrow, until you can remove it; and be careful not to break the arrow when removing it.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it once, then pull the limb to the shoulder until it is pricked, then remove it, for the extraction hurts.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the blood dripping from the wound makes it difficult for you, follow what we have said about the treatment in this chapter; and guard against incising the nerve and the vein, and put effort as you are able to draw out the arrow without danger, or quickly or firmly or strongly; and put the pain according to the form it was in when the arrow fell out, for that is the greatest help that there is, and if you cannot, then put it according to what the signs show.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The arrow that comes from another part, where it opens nothing of the skin, or the skin is inflamed in a place so that one can see or feel it: cut then above, as far as the barbs can be taken, and then extract it: if it breaks now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is stuck in the bone, turn your round hand, as far as it enters the bone, and expand the bone, then remove it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot come out, leave it still, and then restart the extraction until it comes out; and if there was an arrow, and it is stuck, and you view administering gently, if you administer the tool with the point, so that the tip of the arrow enters the bristle of the tool; and then pull out, and if the arrow is caught, pull the tool in entering point, to facilitate the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is embedded, it is necessary that you cut out all of the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, then treat the wound as it should be done.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow is in the neck or abdomen or bladder or rib, and it is close, and you can cut over it, if you can; and do not cut the vein and nerve, and then extract it, and then treat the wound as necessary; and the care until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the forceps used to remove arrows is similar to an owl's beak, and this is its form:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many ways: large, medium, and small, according to the amount of blood.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the needle is also like the beak of a bird, to pierce at the tip of the blood, like this:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The shape of the hooks for piercing and holding is as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	veins common to the body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	There are 31 veins that can be tapped from, of which there are 16 main ones: two behind the ears, called "the herbs"; and two arteries in each temple; and two veins in each arm, called "aspires"; and the vein in the forehead; and the vein at the top of the nose; and the two jugulars on the neck; and the two veins in the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins called "augeherich"; and the two veins outside the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The common veins that are usually opened are three in each arm: the one is connected to the cephalic, and is on the right side, and is called "the great vein" by the people; and the middle one is called "the breast," and is composed of the cephalic and basilic, and is called "the vein of the heart" by the people; and the basilic is on the left side, and is called "the stomach vein," and is above the fossa, and is the one that is usually opened, which opens clearly above the belly.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the saphenous vein is the one that is between the auricular and anular, and it is on the arm; and in the leg and where the heel is, there are three veins: the first one is outside the hollow of the right side costeit, and the second one is at the knee of the left costei; and the vein that is called "the knee," which is at the knee of the other costei; and in the other leg, there are three veins.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	For the fire cauterization, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	The first sentence is a bit difficult to understand due to its archaic language and medical terminology. However, based on the context and the other sentences provided, it seems to be discussing the use of fire cauterization for treating certain conditions. The sentence appears to be instructing the patient to allow their hairs to grow long and even before undergoing the procedure, and to keep their eyes steady if they feel any pricking sensation at the base of their hair.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The opening of the vein in the forehead is as valuable as the opening of the cephalic diseases of the face, headache, and rheumatism; and the quality is such that the pain is strained, twisting their neck, until the vein appears; then take the instrument called «fosseur», which has the following shape:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And place the point above the vein, and hold it with your hand or something else, and let the blood issue according to the quantity you see; then release the neck from the pain, and tie the vein until it is healed and never again with a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	It is not necessary for the fire to be too hot or the iron to be sharp, because the bone is close, and by chance it may break the flames when it is thin.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The sharpness of the second vein that is in the two armies helps to those who are twisted, and to the wrist, and to the elbow, and to the eye in the oil, and to diseases of the face; and the quality of their sharpness is such that the pains are strange when they twist from any limb, as before; then the sharpness, and let the sharpness pass through, a little long of the flame, a little wide, because there is no char.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flames are thin, perhaps it will break; then apply pressure to the blood, as much as you have skill, and then bind with linen, and tie it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The saliva from the vein is good for ague, and for swelling, and for diseases of the face, such as headaches and fever that comes in the face, and always when it is ancient; and the quality of the saliva is that the pains strain their neck, then straighten their neck with your right hand, and take the thin flame long, and push it into the space between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well at once, and the blood will begin to flow now; and do not move too much in front, and apply pressure to the blood according to your need, then tie it for one night, because it is soon restored; and this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The application of the second sinew helps to narrow the alar cartilages, and at the beginning of meseling, and in many diseases, and in impetigo, and in corrosions, and in herpes, and in stomatology; and the quality of the sinew is such that the pains strain their neck on one side and the other, as we have said; and so the masters are above the chief of the pains, and the pains lie on the first seat, then wash the wound with a long brush gently, then draw out the blood frequently, or as much as the matter requires; then do the other side in the other wound, then release the sinew, and hold the wounds evenly, so that the pains do not strain; and leave it until morning, so that the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	of the health of the livers
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The health of the livers above the teeth helps to cool in the mouth, and prevents tooth decay, and cracks in the lips, and drying out and inside.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the quality of this health is to make the pain disappear before you, and strain its neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left, and they are known by the fact that they are black, and by the fact that around them there are small black veins: therefore examine both of them, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt, then examine the largest of each part, and do the same with the two veins that are above and below, for it is the same way.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	of the tongue's disorder
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The disorder of the veins that are outside the tongue is helped after the disorder of the cephalic, and it is by constriction of the throat, and diseases of the eye, and diseases of the mouth; and the quality of the physician is such that the diseases cease between your hands before the sun, and you lift the tongue, and look outside on each side a black vein: therefore heal both, and do not move too much, because outside are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins that are commonly cured are cured in two ways: either by pricking at all the flame miraculously wide, or by fine needles as if cutting through, and is called "aneurism"; and they are wide and fine according to the breadth and constriction of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the flame mirror is very famous, and is as wide as you see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it has a task to open the veins that are deep and plain of thick blood that appears, and that contains thick blood and trouble; and this is the form of the flame mirror.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	And it is more delicately pointed, and is for cleaning the veins that are delicate, where there is delicate thick blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The cleansing of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are outside the throat, and where the collarbone, and where the chest, and where the belly; and it is necessary for the cleaner to clean it properly, and to remove the artery that is outside.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if he cuts the artery, and blood flows out, it is necessary to compress it, as I have said; and do not prick at the fire, but cut off as donkeys.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the basilica does not open clearly, it is necessary to reset and change another one; or you want any rain of it, or you save in its place the vein in the arm: it opens clearly; and cut off as donkeys, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you know the place of the vein, it is necessary to reset the arm until you touch the vein; then sign the vein, and then bind the arm, and compress the vein with fire as donkeys; and be careful not to strike the artery when you see the vein swell, for it is the artery: avoid that.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you see it protruding high like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and thin, then it is from an artery: hurry then, and put your hand on it long, then take your hand off when it stops bleeding; hold the arm still, and let it not move the painful part; and be afraid, and do not move it until it is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	If the blood does not stop, and it hurts, and the medicine is not present, then cut the artery if it opens, because the blood will flow out; and stop the bleeding.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	Take a sharp knife, and cut it, and take one of the halves and place it well above the other; if it is not stained, it is good; if not, as we have said, use the powders that stop bleeding; and the stoppings are not too greasy in many positions for the small wound of the sore, and the position of the hand.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The vein in the middle helps if it treats blood from above, and from the body, because it is composed of the basilica and the cephalic, as we have said; and it is necessary for the vein to search through all the nerves that are out, and if it does not too much in front, and he finds the nerve, and he inflates and the salve is either greasy, and perhaps cannot heal; and this nerve opens often, and if it does not open in any man by its subtlety, then you must use the salves from the instrument anesil; and shield the nerve to your power.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	If there is a vein between the two nerves, make it long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The puncturing of the cephalic vein helps, as it draws blood from the head, and also helps with the other veins; and it is best to puncture in the basilic or median cubital vein, for this is the safest of all veins, as it has no nerves or arteries.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	In any case, it is best to choose the lightest vein, and do not cause harm if it must be done for the first time, and then start again; and sometimes the veins swell in some people, but it does not cause harm the first time.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the health is according to your thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you must know about health is that healing is done only to maintain health and to prevent diseases from coming; and the healing should be done in one of the three veins that are either open: that is, cephalic, femoral, and basilic; and if it should be done at the beginning of the day, in autumn, and in winter after eating, when the sign of repletion appears; and if it should be done on the first day or the third, after two hours or three days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The remedy given for diseases does not have a fixed time determined, but rather it depends on whether the need is urgent or not, at all hours and in all circumstances; and one should not give remedies to children under fourteen years of age, nor to pregnant women except during the last four months of pregnancy.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	One should also not give remedies to the elderly who have passed sixty years of age.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	When one wishes to give remedies, in whatever manner it may be, it is necessary to clean the intestines of a light clyster if they have too much feces retained, so that the veins do not draw out superfluous and harmful substances into the principal members; and one should not give remedies to those who are too fat from meats, or too thin, as long as they are strong, nor to hydriopics; and if one wishes to give remedies after a colic attack, vomiting, diarrhea, and frequent bowel movements, and constant pregnancy, childbirth, watching and fasting, and all the virtues of the body or the arm or the chest; then subtly the humors, if they are not too thick, by foods and drinks and medicines, if you have them; then bathe or bain, if nothing prevents, to subtilize the blood, and to heal from the vein in the middle of the third hour, as we have said; and guard that day from work, from pain, from luxury, and from similar things; and be tied and joined, and let the remedies be higher than those given, and let the arm be rubbed twice or three times, then strain the joint above slow movement, for when it is too strong or weak, it cannot correct the sin; and then rub the hand of the affected limb, until the veins swell, and feel the pain; then moisten the remedies with a drop of old oil, then put its due amount on the right hand over the vein of the affected limb, wherever one wishes to give remedies, that the vein does not burst and fail to hit.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that flee as quickly as strings to the scribe, and if there are such that are plain in their vulnerability, so that when placed over the flame, they withdraw from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus are of those; and if the scribe attempts the vein, then the wound is too tight, because it is necessary that the scribe be aware of these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens the first time, it is good; if not, then restart a little below that point or horizontally, as long as the veins are not inflamed.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the veins are inflamed, and the pain increases, leave it for one or two days, and do not tie the arm: perhaps an abscess will form; do not enter water, then restart the cutting if it pleases him; and if the wound is small, or if you doubt that there is as much blood as you saw, then trust in that wound directly with the flame; and the work a little horizontally, as long as the veins are inflamed; because this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the leg swelling, do not begin the treatment immediately, and put a small amount of oil on it, as it reduces the flow of blood, and it is effective in this leg like the oil; and thus administer the oil in every wound that you treat to stop the flow of blood; and the same is done with triangular and bandage dressings, when it is put on the leg; if the swelling is too great, separate it.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if there are large abscesses that often occur, exactly when it is not treated until this time or the opening of the vein is small, hurry up, and put on the leg a soft sponge in hot and a cloth a little; and hold it for an hour; and it should be done after the blood has flowed from the vein, and if it remains in the leg for any time without becoming black or green, do not remove it; and if you see, put on anything of aloes or of myrrh mixed with honey, mustard, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often there is an abscess and appearance of the wound in the church: put then your hand on it, and if you press the wound too much with your hand, that is the wrong appearance.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore do not put anything on it that we have said, for perhaps in cutting without the artery; but make a dry poultice to harden the wound, then treat it with other treatments, until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And take each type of wound according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the wound.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the wound is black, let it bleed until it turns red; and if you see it swollen, let it bleed until it becomes thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is appropriate for the one who is pained and has a wound, and has the task of extracting arrows, to make a larger wound, and let the flames be wide; and for the weak one, do the opposite, and frequently apply a small amount of heat, and it should be applied by cutting across, not by pricking; and this method of heating is safe from the fragmentation of arrows and the twisting of nerves, and it is better than the healing that comes from a long or wide wound.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for the one whose body requires heating during the healing process, it is appropriate to give bread made from ground apples; if they are hot, take out the arrow three or four times; and if they are of cold complexion, change the bread to a mustard bread before the healing, or a honeyed syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and a very fragrant syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he applies a bandage to the wound after much bleeding, it is necessary to apply a broth of charcoal and an aromatic syrup, and use other things that we have said in the chapter or section on syncope for the evacuation of blood.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to bandage an arm and bleed again, it is necessary that when he is weakened by much bleeding, he should do so slowly and gradually according to the quantity of its continuous virtue.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And if he wants to bandage an arm after the first bleeding, and he has bled greatly, he should do so seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And if one wishes to heal on another part, one must heal the second joint or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For it has much blood within the body that is already heated, and causes fever; so one must draw out a great quantity, and widen the vein until it opens wide; then one must restore all the conditions of healing, and place one's hand on the wound when it is healed, so that the patient does not die in the absence of a pulse, and this has often happened, when the healer is negligent; and it is not good to see the arm being lifted, and drawing blood the second time, and the vein is closed, that one presses firmly; but if it is crooked, one must extend the arm quickly, for this would be bad; but let it heal the second time; or you do not point to the tip of the flame, so that the blood frozen in the vein does not come out, and put a little vinegar on the wound, and press firmly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if it is inflamed, let it be and do not press it until the abscess is calmed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if necessary, draw out the blood from another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is healed in place of the main vein because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the method of healing is that the hairs bend their hand in hot, until the vein is red; then tie it gently, so that the vein appears well, then draw out the blood across, not narrow or long; and let the punctures be large, and heal well near the joint of the hand, and if no blood can issue, put the hand in hot water, and let the blood flow out in hot water until you have enough; and if it is still bleeding, do not put the hand back in hot water, because it will bleed more than before; and the healing of this vein is safer from all other veins, that there is no artery or nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The salve of the savior of the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver, and it is thus: strain the hand, and boil in hot water until the blood flows out, if one sees it; and if the salve is against the direction, and if you apply it with everything, it will not hurt anything; and do not go too soon to bed, for the nerves are all exposed to the cold, and then put the hand in hot water, if it is not frozen in the wound, and it cannot come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the arrow as much as is necessary, put oil and thread on the wound to sew it quickly, and do so for each one.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The right palm is beneficial for the disease of the mouse, and do everything as I have told you on the other side.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The right sole is beneficial for all diseases that are outside the body, such as marsh fevers, retention of urine, and diseases of the kidneys, bladder, old legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the quality of its sole is that the diseases are quickly expelled in hot water, and rubbed on the vein until it perishes, and tied above the joint; and the vein is at the knee, and from there much rain flows; therefore, the sole is beneficial for a wide rain, or at the knee, which is more valuable.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you have healthy bones above the joint, and you are warned of the nerves that are displaced, and the joint is crossed as in casting; and let the flames be equal.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if it cannot issue from the bone, then reset the joint in the high position, and let the vein drain well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the first bone needs to be reset, then start the second one slightly above, because the bones are salty; do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and so make the other joint equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The vein of the sciatic nerve is at the knee of the thigh, and its resetting is worth the pain of the hip, when it comes to a deep wound.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the qualities of his sickness are such that the hairs between or in the bath, and is strange above the ankle four times twisted, for otherwise it does not open the vein; and if it opens, then heal it in all ways that you can, and across; and it is good that you cover it, for the less are safe, and it is very vulnerable to humans.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not straighten it, then it heals none of those who open or fall down a little bit, and towards the small toe, and guard against the nerves; and correct so much blood as you see, and then release the ligament, and put it on cotton and hold it tight; it is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	of cupping glasses
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Cupping glasses are made of horns, or of brass, or of glass; and ventosation is done in two ways: either by pricking and drawing blood, or without pricking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this ventosation that is done without pricking is done in two ways: either all at once, or gradually; and ventosation that is done by pricking and drawing blood is done in fourteen places on the body, of which one is entirely on the back; and the others are placed on the neck; and the other two are on the shoulders; and the cupping glasses below the jaw; and the cupping glasses on the arms; and the cupping glasses on the legs; and the cupping glasses on the ankles; and this ventosation does not treat blood, except for small veins that are scattered in the body, and therefore it does not weaken anyone, as is done with bleeding from a vein; and it should not be administered, either all at once or gradually, in any disease caused by repletion, until the whole body is drained.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if necessary for diseases, one must ventilate, or by custom, one should ventilate each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in every ten; for there are some who, when they have to ventilate, have heavy breathing; and some who have swelling and redness in their face, and on their head, and around their eyes; and some who have a little blood in their mouth, and tilt their tongue, and spit blood; and there are some who snore, and see through smoky and clouded vision, and die and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the month of May, we order them to fast for three hours after noon.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The purging of the bile helps with the pain in the head … it comes to them, and it is only necessary after the evacuation of all the body; and this fasting is in place of the purging of the cephalic, and it is only necessary for those who are of cold complexion or who have diarrhea, because this does great harm; and for this reason it is not necessary for the guardian to use it, or those who have or head cold diseases.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who often become unconscious, should have the leech placed a little lower due to the doubt of unconsciousness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The vacuum on the neck is in place of the head and the basin, and therefore it is good for narrowing the throat, and to open the windpipe, and to all, and to repetition; and it should not be held too tightly, because if it is held too tightly, it causes unconsciousness or stomach pain and heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The vacuum on the two ribs of the neck is good for headaches, toothache and migraine, and strangulation, and pain at the roots of the teeth, and it is in place of the head and basin; and it should be commanded to the patient that he express his hand when placing it, that he not press the artery, and do not cause blood to flow.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	The ventilation of the mouth is beneficial for diseases of the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the place of the remedies of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The ventilation of the shoulders is beneficial for diseases that come from heat and filling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The ventilation of the elbows is as beneficial as three veins of the arm, for it draws blood from these large veins; and commands the healer not to prick too much in front, for the inside is bare of flesh, and knows how to be dislodged from nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The vacuum that is on the back should be used for morbid conditions from the foundation, and for diseases of dislocation, and it should be a large, iron one, that can properly pull; and perhaps, if it was too thin, it would break; and I make great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The vacuum of the legs is healthy, as they attract blood from all over the body, and are useful for old pains of the rain, and the marsh, and the bladder, and restore the flowers; and they are in place of the second phalanges, and the second metatarsals, and throughout they weaken the body after long use, and bring fainting in many conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The method of applying the vacuum is that you first apply it empty and quickly succeed, then press it strongly and move it evenly, and do not stop doing this until you see the liver red and swollen, and open the vein of blood; then fasten, and replace the vacuums, and take care in the position of the body, for there are some who have tender flesh and clear pores: it is necessary to strike once only, and it is necessary to make large wounds, and one deep; and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the sin is large, it is necessary to strike twice: the first time to finely pierce the path of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if it is very sharp, then you must strike the third time; and when we want to draw out the arrow slowly and slowly, we should only do it once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we want a lot of blood, then we should often repeat it; and if the arrow is very sharp, then strike it from the front, and the end should be perceived slowly, and it is suitable for those who have thick skin and are tough, that you use the oils of an appetite and dissolving: if it is in this state, of violet oil, or of sweet almond oil, or of cucumber seed oil; and if it is in winter, of pennyroyal, lily, camomile, or other similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is large and cold, take oil of tamarisk, or balm, or aniseed oil, and similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the one who is to be bled has wide and large veins, then one should not put any oil on it, but it should be washed after the venipuncture with hot rose water, or hot cold water, or water of myrrh, or water of cucumber, or water of porcelain, or similar things.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have much moisture, if they are raised with ash water, or hot water of myrtle, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	Those with excessive superfluities rise from old wine, or vinegar of sugar, or decoction of anise or chamomile, or other similar things; and they should not be purged before the bath, but after the bath for one hour or two; and they should not sleep after the enema, and it is good that they move, when they should be enemized and when they are enemized.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And if those who are purged are choleric, and they are not too agitated and inflamed; then it is good that they take cold things, such as green apples and endives and leeks at the spoon, and similar things; and thin gruel, and cataplasm of St. John's wort, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And those who have a cold constitution, take honey syrup, aromatic wine between old and new, and a little mustard, and small olives and pigeons; and the day they are to vomit, they should drink more than they eat; and it is necessary to give some men triphala or muscat before vomiting, or after, to strengthen the main members; and the subtle ones should not drink it, but only those who are strong.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The suction cups that are applied to the body are those that are applied to the liver, and to the spleen, and to the sciatica, and to the stomach and the belly and the ribs, because these members do not suffer from being applied on the outside, and no one does it except to draw blood from member to member, as we put suction cups on the breasts when the baby is born; to remove the viscosity that is in the member, as we apply suction cups to the stomach and to the belly to ease the member; and remove the pain, when there is an abscess or a stone, if it is removed by its attractive power perhaps the abscess, or dislodge the stone from its place; and thus it is done as soon as they put it on the liver and on the spleen when there is retained viscosity, and these suction cups are administered empty for moisture only; and sometimes they are administered together with heat, and sometimes with cold water, such as in diseases of the pleurisy, and in this way one fills the suction cup with hot boiling water, or with cold water where there are harmful herbs cooked.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the suction device administered by fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And it has two inches of width and half a palm of depth, and it has or is covered with a small hole in the middle, as to put a needle, and it is made of tin, so that it does not burn the skin when placed on the limb; and it has in the middle a thin rod of tin or iron, for placing a candle, and they are large and small according to the diseases and age of those who take them; for the suction devices of children are different from those of the elderly, and the thin ones are different from the thick ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And one should thus place this suction cup on the limb: take the wax or liniment, and put it inside the suction cup through the rod that is inside the suction cup, so that the light may be at the bottom of the suction cup so it does not burn the hair; then put it on the limb, and you must do so as we have said, so that when one wants, if the vapor comes out, and remove the suction cup; and take the liniment as before, and repeat often, if you have the skill.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the suction cup that is administered in the disease of pleurisy, at all times, there is no rod or stopper, and it is not administered until it is full of water, and it is placed on the limb alone; and this is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Sansues are not used except in members where one cannot place suction for their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar things; and in similar members, such as fingers or toes, and others like them; and the quality of using sansues is that when you remove sansues that are in soft waters without pressure, take them; and put them in soft water until they are familiar, and have nothing in their bellies; and then cleanse the member with blood and suction, then rub the member until it is red, and put on the sansues; and when they are plain and blackened, if it is a place where one can place suction, place it, for this is very helpful.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If not, first raise the limb from the lowest to the highest position, well, and then wipe it; if the wound is too large after the fur of the fleas, then dip a piece of linen in cold water, and place it on top, until the wound is cleansed; and if the wound multiplies, then place on top vitriol shattered, or galls, and similar things, until it is cleansed; or you place half of pounded beans on the wound, and leave them until they dry on the limb, it will stop now; and if you have more, take other fleas.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	If the snakes do not want to take, rub the wound with fresh blood, or you have a needle as long as the snake, and then place them on top, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will bite; and when you see that they are biting, powder with a little aloe and beaten silk, or ash, so they will now die.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it restores fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Listen, dear son, that the foolish people may not see this chapter, that they have never seen any of the ancient books, nor have read any letters; and for this reason the science is hidden in our land, because I found none good; and I know nothing, except by the science of the ancient books, which I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and by experiment, and by the custom of my life; and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained, and have abbreviated it at the end, and have shown clearly the forms of the instruments that are necessary, as I have done in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, we should say or prologue of this book the sums of the word and the chapters where the wise put his understanding, and stay on the truth, so that those who are experienced find and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when fracture or dislocation or twisting or wounding comes to anyone, it is necessary to treat the injury on one side and the other, if nothing stops you, as weakness of body, or children, or elderly; or if the pain is not very great, or too cold; and use cold remedies, that is to say, cold jackets, and eagle and chicken broth, and do not drink wine, and do not use any fatty broths, and do not fill oneself too much with food that fills the veins with blood, until you have no doubt of abscess, or spreading of matter to the member; then the injuries return to their usual government as they have used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary to apply a poultice of meat that causes large swelling, or has viscosity, such as cooked wheat, and rice, and tests, and peas, and pancakes of milk, and eggs, and fish, and fresh wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For the poultice causes pain and heals more quickly than the break.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that broken bones of the elderly and infirm do not heal well or mend according to their nature due to the weakness of the limbs, nor those who are too tender, such as the bones of small children; but rather, reset and joint the member together, as it was before, until it is strong again; and do not let them work at all, and for this reason, it is necessary to apply a poultice of large meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And the fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the hand or leg, and I will tell you all the ways of fracture in this chapter.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a fracture that goes through the bone, and another in soaking, like the tip of a quill for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a fracture with a wound, and a small cut.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And each kind has its own method, and its proper instrument in restoration, according to what memory comes to its mind; and the fracture of the bone is known by the fact that the leg is twisted, and open wide by deficiency, and it is pressed by the hand; and when there is no tortuosity or it is not at the touch, and the pains are not great, if there is no fracture; but it can well have tortuosity, or a cut, or a small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	It is not necessary that you move it with your hand, but put on the medicines that come after this, and then gently constrain it now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And if the fracture that was in arvoil is now separated into two parts, you should now put them back together evenly, as with abscesses that come and go; and if they are hard and painful, do not let any joint move until the abscess is soothed; then gently put them back to where you can lightly and safely, and if the restoration of this is lighter than the restorations of those who have pieces, then constrain it as it should be after this.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if it is broken into pieces in the bone, if it is a hand or foot, or to your hand if it is small members, or to two strings, or to one string and to your hand; and put the member according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken member are joined, you should join them with all your skill to avoid causing further injury or pain; and properly set the two bones according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel it with your hand if it seems to you that it is not quite right: if it is well dressed, and do not strain it too much, or press it as those who bring their work by force and contraction to the member, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the limb is at a point, carefully keep it from moving the painful part, neither while awake nor while sleeping, nor while turning, nor in any other way; and make sure that the limb is so secure that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when it feels no pain, it is not yet at a point, and it should be put in the best position so that it feels no pain; and make sure it is placed straight, so that twisting does not come when it is restored; and the quality of the limb broken depends on what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	The qualities of the limb broken depend on their size, greatness, and form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For there are small members, such as arms and legs and similar ones: if it is necessary to wrap them in soft and thin linen cloths; and those that are large, such as thighs: if it is necessary to wrap them in a wide and strong cloth, because the wide bands embrace the whole member, and hold it evenly from all parts, so that there is no gap; then wrap light bandages around the limb, three or four times according to the length of the limb, and hold your hand a little on every part of the cloth, then go above the fracture and hold it less, than the fracture can be moved a little; then soften the cloth a little and a little, until you grasp a large part of the healthy flesh, then take another cloth and return around the broken part; then return to the part away from the fracture, and hold it evenly, not too hard or too forcefully, as we have said in the first chapter above; then place between the cloths linen or cloth bandages, until they are all even, then tie everything together from above with a bandage, and then put your well-made bandages on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is an abscess or boil, put something soothing on the abscess to open it, and what opens the abscess, and leave it like that for some time; then strain it through a cloth, and be of half a wide bowl cleanly, or of wood from which the lancets are made, or of palm leaves, and be according to this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	But the thread that one puts on the wound should be a little larger and wider than the others; and it should also be as long as the member of smallness or greatness requires; then strain it through the threads just as you did in the first layer, then tie it under a thread evenly, as in the first layer over the break; the tighter it is, the less; and it should be that the threads are medium, neither too thick nor too thin, and of linen; for if the threads are thick, as I have seen works of the foliage that make their strings of linen twisted, and it is great error, because the bandage cannot be equal if it is too fine, and it should not be that there is less than two fingers' space between each thread.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the wounds are closed by the pricks of the needles after straightening them in their proper place, put some unbleached linen or cotton between them so that they do not become infected.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the bone broken, and the splint is broken, I will tell you the treatment after this.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And do not strain with needles all the broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the limbs are large, it is not good to put needles immediately after 5 or 7 days, or more depending on your risk of abscess; and get the manner of ancient plasters to restore breakage, dislocation, and torsion: and it is that you take some flour that is kept as a wall of the mill, and mix it with much water, and put this mixture, not too clear nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common method of the plaster restoring breakage to many positions, and especially for women and small children, for it is not too rough.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another method of healing fractures, dislocations, and twists: take alabaster and lavender and enule and asafetida and Arabic gum and myrrh, each 1 Z.; mire and aloes, each 5 Z.; alechil 8 Z.; and grind them into a powder, and mix with honey; if the patient's constitution is hot, use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and it quickly heals broken bones, and it saves many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another method of healing twists: take myrrh and valerian, each 10 Z.; mire and aloes, each 8 Z.; acacia 6 Z.; bolic armenic 10 Z., and grind them well, and mix with vinegar or honey, and administer.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another way to treat joints and bones that are dislocated from their place, and to ease the pain, and to use the bone and the broken piece: take a new bone, and soften it in oil and cooked fat, and put it on the joint.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	This plaster does not heal completely, but it is good for easing out abscesses, and properly treats the pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another way to treat broken bones that heal: take dried fig leaves and earthworms, grind them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another way to treat the healing of broken bones and to ease the remaining pain from the abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take the root of viscum, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of each one in equal parts; and grind, and mix with wine, and if the limbs are cold, mix with mustard mixed with water, or dry mustard, and use.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another way to apply, besides the first, when an abscess is difficult to restore to the member.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take the root of viscum, and seeds of linseed, balm, melissa, and sansuce, and flowers of violets and chamomile, of all one part; and grind, and mix with mustard mixed with salt, or dry mustard, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates said in his book that one should not put on a broken limb to restore it, except for a mixture of wax and oil, and nothing else, and he said that it should be between two, neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems that Galen said that one should put on a broken limb to restore it, with dry things slightly warm, such as mercury and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to treat the injury and pain: take mugwort and horsehair, or feathers of an owl, and smash them, and mix them equally, and make a plaster and apply it to the wound.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then release the joint a little later, and be careful if there is no pain or the bone of its limb moves; do not release it by force again. And if pain comes to the limb, or itching, without rest or swelling, then hasten, and release it, and remove the plaster now; and take a light bandage, and moist sponge from sea water, and soak in hot, and raise the limb, until the itching stops, and calm the pain; then let the member rest for an hour, then put on dry linen, moistened in hot or rose oil, and tie with a nut, until you are sure of no abscess forming; and relieve the inflammation of the limb, and be calmed the pain, then continue the thin bandage, and a little plaster, and do not strain it as much as before; gradually until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	If you see that the abscess is red and swollen and painful and inflamed, and you have the skill of plastering and bandaging, then if it starts to recur, do so evenly as before.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	And if it does not come to the limb at all as we have said, then wait for three days or four or five or seven; and never leave it for twenty days, as long as the bone is not healed, and approach the joint from above; then restrain it more than before, and increase its flesh, as I have said before; and if you see that the bone is healed more than necessary, then do not let any new pus come to it; then apply hot water frequently when you remove it, every day, and loosen the bandage a little; by this method, then cut off the pus from the limb, and repair hastily what the foolish ones do, which tortures the member: it is bad, and if it is not done properly, I see nothing but the loss and doing it straight.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various methods of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	Many methods of breaking are, and various shapes, and the causes are distinguished; for there are breaks that are made by the percussion of a spear, and the collarbone completely breaks the bone at its face which is outside the bone, as it does hatchet or fust; and because of this method of breakage is called «haichure».
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	Or the spear pierces the bone from above through the side, and this method of breakage is called «absolute»; and it is the wound of these two breaks great or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is percussion embedded, or cutting from the side of a spear, or to fall on a stone, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if it has a fracture that is persistent, which approaches the thread that is outside of the bone, or it is above the bone, and this wound is large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if the wound is healed into the bone as thin as a hair, and it is the fracture called "hair-like"; and if the wound made by piercing with an arrow, or falling, or similar thing, and makes the piece of the bone enter below, and is like the nails when they are driven through the chimneys; then the arrow enters inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And it happens more often in those who have or a moist head bone, such as the head of a child; and they have all these kinds of fractures where small pieces are removed like these; and I will speak about this in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all ways of breaking them by pulling up on them, and inquiry with probes, and by the rotten wood that is above.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The appearance of hair is known because when the bone is exposed and rubbed against it, the black breakage becomes apparent.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of the breakage, be careful of the bad accident, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, and loss of consciousness, and extension, and paleness, and fever ague, and the eyes issuing forth and reddening, and other similar things in many conditions, then it cannot be healed without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see any obvious injury, and you hope for recovery, begin treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the broken bone comes first to you, and it is in the thigh, then you should remove the bone before the fourteenth day after the injury as you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in the lower part, then you must remove the bone before the seventh day, provided that the skin over the bone is not corrupted, and the accidents that we have mentioned occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the broken bone comes close to the skin that covers the brain, then it is necessary to cut away the damaged part in this way: and you should grasp the head of the painful wound, and uncover the bone in all ways that you can, and over the shape of the wound more softly than you can, and if blood comes out when the bone is exposed, or an abscess forms, help it according to what is necessary, and it is necessary to fill the wound with moistened linen cloths in rose oil; and let the wound rest until the abscess is relieved, and make sure that blood does not come out; then begin around the bone to remove, and this is done according to the two methods of work: one method is that you cut tightly against the edge in front, and this is the form.
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then another cut larger than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And in the second manner, you should have many different cuts, some narrow and some wide, and sharp and made of iron inde; and work lightly, so as not to wound the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And if the tooth is very hard and out of place, it is necessary that you perforate around it, as long as you administer cuts with tarriers, not piercing through the tooth beyond the test, and it should have above the point a margin or circle, which does not allow the point to pass beyond the tooth; and you should have many of these, so that each comes in its own place of the spine of the tooth, so that you have tarriers for all teeth; and this is the form of the three ways of tarriers:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	To pierce through the broken bone, you should place the tip of your tool on top of the bone and turn it back to your right until you feel that the bone is pierced; then remove the tool from one side slightly, and do the same around the entire bone, then carefully cut away the space between the bones with a sharp instrument, as subtly and lightly as possible, until you remove the bone to your hand or to any of the tools you have such as forceps or pliers; and be careful not to touch the brain or sinuses.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have pierced and removed the bone, it is advisable to remove any remaining fragments of small bones or scales from it with a sharp instrument similar to an incisor, but it should be more delicate and subtle than the other incisor; then treat the wound with tents and ointments as we have mentioned.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other method of work is that which the Greeks call, which is much safer; and it is very effective, and that is their word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is first necessary that you uncover a part of the bone where the fracture is open, so that when you have uncovered that part, you can insert the lens-shaped piece of this incisive tool, which has this shape:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one part, and it is the part that is in two pieces, so that the cutter is towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer above, so that you lightly cut the bone all around, and be careful of the thread that is outside; if it is near the bone, then lightly cut the bone, because it is cut well without harming, and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone's fracture does not pierce through the skin, and the bone is only broken from above, and there are small pieces, it is necessary to smooth that roughness, and remove scales with the fine file you should have various quantities of, to manage each limb in the most convenient way, according to the work and the figure of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you use coarse files first, and then more fine ones, and do not stop doing this until it is well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other hairdressing and fine fracture, it is necessary that you manage according to its direction; and this is a thing that is not returned to the one who put his study in this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the wound is exposed, it is necessary to apply a cloth of linen, according to the quantity of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and place it on the wound; then take another cloth doubled in two or three, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it on the first cloth; and do this more gently than you can, so as not to irritate the wound, then administer by above another remedy, and do not strain it more than to make the wound alone tinge; and leave it thus for a day or two, until the abscess is calmed, then remove it, and administer medicines such as lily roots, flour of vetch, powder of frankincense, and aristolochia, and similar things; and from these things make powder, and place on the wound, and administer liquid medicines without bitterness; and keep the wound clean, so that you do not leave any ointment, or any bandage, for when bandages gather together on the brain, it corrodes and rots, and causes great harm; for when something sharp is placed on the wound, it does not heal.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	If no accidents happen to the patient, as we have said, then it is uncertain with doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if no other harm comes except for what medicine has been placed on, that it may have virtue, then you must apply a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and a cloth, and place it on the wound; then cure it with methods of curing as it is necessary, until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Never break the two bones above, or one by itself, for they are two bones; and that one is cartilaginous, and does not break unless it is bent or twisted, and then it heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	If one of the two parts is broken, it is necessary that you break your small finger or thumb, and place the broken part inside your index finger, and in the palm by default, until the bone regrows according to its natural shape; and do this lightly, and guard that the pain does not increase due to your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the upper part of the bone, and cannot reach your finger, it is necessary that you place it on the head of a pin or slightly thick.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the break is in both parts, make another and hurry to restore the first joint, if you can; otherwise, after the seventh or eighth day, when the wound heals, then place the head of your finger on the palm of your hand with pieces of linen cloth, if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Where you break it, there the fracture is; and if the tents are too large, they fill the nostrils.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And they say no restorer how to mill the tents in fire, and die each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	I do not think this is good, but it should be milled in the form of an ointment with egg yolk and powdered milk; then leave the tent until the bone is strong and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And never once penned in the nostrils with goose feathers, and if the swelling is around, and hold the fracture, and blow the pain away; now do what you see.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if abscesses come to the nose while you are working, put a piece of cloth or cotton wool soaked in rose oil or a small amount of iodine.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If abscesses do not come to the nose, then apply a poultice of mustard flour and powdered incense, mixed with an egg yolk, then place light bandages on it, and do not tie too tightly around the nose; if the broken part of the nose is small and in many pieces, use suitable instruments to fix it, then cut the wound, and treat the injured parts as appropriate, and apply suitable ointments and poultices as needed; and if there is no wound inside the nose, then treat with tents and apply warm compresses until it is healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	of the jawbone fracture
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is fractured, and there is no wound elsewhere, and the fracture is only so much, and is not broken into two pieces, but rather is crushed inwardly, if one knows it lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the fracture is in the right part, you should push your index finger into the mouth of the patient; and if the fracture is in the left jawbone, push your index finger with your right hand, and push the fracture inwardly lightly, and push it to the other hand by default, and make it even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the jaw is in two, then it is necessary to administer extension of two parts until they are even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if movements of the teeth occur, or a break, then strain them with a gold, silver, or silk thread, and place over the broken jaw, and place over the cloth a double layer; and place over the cloth a great well-made sponge, or a piece of leather evenly long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it with a string so that you can, and command to not move, and feed light food.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	And if you see that the shape changes, then remove it from the animal, and then put back what was changed; and place a poultice on it, of the flour of the mill with abundant urine or flour of mustard, after you have removed the cerote; and place over the poultice another light cloth, and if the poultice becomes hard, and the disposition of the patient does not change, leave it as long as it is healed; often it is healed in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	If abscesses come up, then follow what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, do not remove any piece of the bone that is osseous; rather, carefully remove it with unsuitable instruments to this purpose.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, then enlarge it according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces, and there is none left, then clean the wound, if it is wide, and put on unsuitable bandages to this purpose, to stop bleeding until they are healed.
de la forcele	of the elbow
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The elbow breaks many times in front and behind the shoulder, and the break occurs in three ways: either it is broken and dislocated into two, and there are pieces, and it is the least heavy to restore; or there is a break with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And if the work is about the break with a wound, you should have two assistants, so that one tends to the injury where the elbow is broken; and the other extends the arm towards the affected part; then set the break evenly to your two hands, so that it forms as it should be, and there is no appearance or movement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you have the skill to extend further, place a rounded ball of cloth or linen, and as large as your need; extend and relieve the tension, and hold the sphere in your hand, so that you can align the fracture as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the shoulder back, because it comes out front, then you should align the fracture as well as possible above its natural position, and place a median ear under the shoulder, and lift the bone of the shoulder until the bone is elevated.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then apply the bandage to your wounds, and if you have loose teeth, it is necessary that you cut through; and carefully suture the pieces, and if the bone cannot be joined for any reason, then use one of the instruments you have; but do not put force on the forceps, to avoid damaging the gums:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and it seems like a spoon, and is not too tight, and should be as wide as needed, according to the size of the bone and the skill of the work; and have two prongs, one wide and the other narrow, as the tear in the wound that you made when you sutured the bones; and when you are sure there is no abscess, then clean the wound, and if the tear is small, or you doubt there is an abscess, then use dressings and tents according to the size of the wound.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if an abscess comes, if it bursts, soak the cloth in rose oil and in vinegar and in wine, and put it on.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The splinting of the bone, when it is painful and when it is fractured, is that you put it on top of the bone the plaster of the mill powder and some mud, and put it on. Then take a very large bandage of a palm wide, then put the cloth double over the light dressing, and the plaster; then take a subtle staff of three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around that bandage, so that the head of the bandage is hanging down; and put the staff on the fracture, and turn the bandage over the neck, and outside the fracture sane, and outside the fracture painful; and tie each part, and when you see that the bandage holds the fracture evenly, and you see clearly that the staff does not move over the broken bone, reward it every day, and when the bones are healed, hold it; then make the painful part lie on his back, and put what little mud is outside the fracture to raise the fracture in the top; if it aligns the shoulder by the alignment of the space, or you tie the arm to the neck, and if no bad accidents happen, for 20 days; then recommend the plaster, if you see that it has a job, and hold it and let it be so, until it is restored; and it is restored in the most 28 days, and less to some people.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the shoulder fracture
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	It rarely happens that the shoulder is broken or out of its place, and it is not fixed except by touch; if the fracture follows the figure of the break, and the bone is placed according to its natural form, in all ways you can; then put powder from the mill with abundance of honey on the limb, and lightly stop it, and put a double cloth on top; then put on a wide and delicate splint, a little wider than the shoulder, and if the splint does not touch any part of the shoulder, then use a piece of linen to make it even; and then tightly bandage all around, so that the splint does not move from its place, and watch the limb every day; and every time it is broken, tighten the bandage, and if the splint is out of place, and cover the wounds on its side; and the shoulder is restored in 20 days or 25 days, And when these numbers are completed, remove it, and be careful, for it is not bones that can be fixed firmly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone is torn off before the wound heals, and not removed, then cutting into it, and the bone, and do what we have said in the breaking of the malleolus to alleviate an abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	of the breaking of the pis
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The pis is never broken in the middle, but it does happen sometimes; but it breaks often at the back.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, it declines towards the outside, and the patient feels great pain, and lack of movement, and all, and possibly vomits blood, and the bones are open in the broken bone, and the patient does not feel well.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that the hairs are carefully arranged over their back, and the hand is placed between the shoulder blades, then the shoulders are pressed, and the ribs of the two sides are held in your hands, and subtly put even to all the ways you can, until the shape of the bone is as it should be; then place bandages and soft ones above the thin bone of salt, or other light one, and wrap it in a cloth, and tie it to the broken bone, so that it does not move; and return the limb gently to the back, and gradually strap it, and rewrap it every hour, and if it moves, strap it again; and if it is necessary to remove it for corrosion or itching that comes to the skin, or pain or abscess, then hurry, remove it, and wash the bandage, and apply what has come from methods of healing; then rewrap the bandage, and strap it until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	of the rib fractures
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	The rib fractures only come from great blows to the chest after the back, and at the neck, and they do not break unless because they are sharp; and the pain is felt well in the interrogation of them.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the treatment is that you set the fracture as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	Then apply the plaster, and the bandage of a splint, if you know how to do it.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the rib fracture is inclined inward, it causes great pain and tenderness, as if of pleurisy, because the ribs do not protect; and there is a great deal of blood, and a great deal of blood flow, and this is a great sickness, and the ancients have put much effort into it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And for those who say it is necessary to administer foods that cause the stomach to swell, in order to push the rib out of place.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do this unless an abscess is present.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it is present, then lance it.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they say that none of those who put suction cups on the limb for draining are wrong, and this is reasonable; however, doubt arises because the suction cup may not draw out the excess from the limb due to its weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say that none of those who cover the limb with linen soaked in olive oil and place tents between the ribs to equalize the fluid around it are wrong, then treat the wound with poultice, food, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the pain is great and the patient cannot bear it due to the bone that does not pierce the skin, and there is doubt, then you must cut above the broken rib on the side, and place a splint on the wound; then you must break the bone, gently pull it out, and then suture the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and treat them with ointments until they are healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes out, place moist cloths on top of the abscess; and treat it while the wound is healing, and let it lie flat on top of the side where it should be, until it is healed.
de la brisure dou col	of the broken neckbone
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	No time comes when the breaker of the neckbones appears, and it is rare that they bleed; and also at the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will be healed or not, if you see their hands softened and swollen and dead, and they cannot move or extend them, and when you touch them with a needle, they do not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	It is known that it is deadly in many positions, and if they move and feel well when you hold them and do not, then know that the joint of the bone is saved, and the pains are healed, if they are treated.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if a similar thing comes to the spine of the back, and you know whether it is healthy or not, if you take notice of whether the feet are soft, and if the accidents that are in their hands, and above the back, there is a sense of ventosities and egestion without volition; and when they lie on their belly, there is egestion without volition.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when they are lying on their back and they want to sit up, they cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	It is a fatal condition: do not labor in its care.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come to them, it is the lighter condition.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is that you reward if there is an abscess open, put oil of roses or hen's fat on it until it is soothed; then put on one of the healing plasters and drying, and tie with a bandage, and command the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where you feel the pain, until it is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is dry, it is necessary to cover it with a cloth; then take the bone, then gather the two edges of the wound, if it is large, to a seam, then treat the wound with ointment applying charcoal, until it is healed; and if the bone is broken, which is called the "bone of the cow", if you have a pouch in your right hand, put it even on the other hand to your power, then put the plaster and the bandage on top, if you know how; then strain it, and if there is dry bone, do it again, and take the bone, and treat the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the ribs of the back
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	It rarely happens that the ribs of the back are broken, and if it does, it is not often accompanied by a slight decrease in the chest; making it long, and declining to the side, and coming to the painful joint, and swelling, and inflammation as it is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is such that you extend your hand over it, until you are over the broken rib; and cleanse those that are the fracture and its shape; and if the fracture is only at the top, then set it evenly until it is in its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long or declines to the inside, place the injured limb on its belly until the healing of this fracture is complete.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have placed it evenly, apply the poultice, then place a splint of wood or cloth, and hold the fracture so it does not move; and fill the wound on both sides, until it is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on their uninjured side or on their back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if an abscess forms, do not touch it until the abscess is calmed, and follow what we have previously said; then return to healing, and hold it as it should be, if there is no bad accident; and this is how it is done.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the shoulder dislocation
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder is the area between the neck and the top of the shoulder. If it is broken, one should restore it according to one of the two methods: one method is that you take a smooth bone, according to this form:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie the two broken pieces together and lift them up, and saw the painful part above the seat; then pour some water over the broken arm, as much as it can bear, and put a splint on it, then place any heavy object or the minister extends it below; then put the splint in the patient's hands together, until the broken piece returns as it should be.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other way is that one should press the pain above its shoulder, and hold the hand on its neck, then command the two ministers that one ties what is above the broken bone to his hands, and the other ties behind all of it, and stretches each to its part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	If you see that the extraction is too far, then hold the tie outside of the broken bone, above the broken bone, and stretch each of the ministers to its part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the broken bone is near the top of the shoulder, then it is necessary to place the tie outside of the shoulder blade, and the other towards the back, outside of the broken bone; and similarly if the broken bone is towards the back, then it is necessary to place the tie gently, without labor, until the broken bone is even with the shoulder, and with the back, then set the fracture as it should be, and stretch it, if there are no complications.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if an abscess comes, do not hold it for more than seven days, and put a poultice of wheat flour and rose oil on it until the abscess is soothed; then hold it, and the manner of holding it is that you place the plaster on the swollen part, then bring the arm up to the shoulder or to the chest; and put a bandage, and hold it on the shoulder or on the arm, so that the arm is in its place, as long as nothing prevents it from moving or the bone is not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use splints, and put a wider and stronger splint on the break than the others, and have between each splint two inches of space, and each splint should be so large that it passes the break three inches from each side; then hold them, as I said at the beginning of the chapter, more tightly and less distant.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the seat of the arrows, and the pressure, as we have said, in the bone where you restore the broken member, and you doubt the abscess is deep, let it lie for seven days, as we have said; then look at the joint every three days, that pruritus does not come to it, or the pus does not come to the limb because it is too tense.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the wound, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such accidents come, but only after three days or more, and the pain lies on its back, and has its hands on its stomach; and put the remedy on a cloth evenly, and look at the limb every hour of the day or night, that the shape of the broken member does not move, or the joints are not softened; if the wound heals by the power of medicine, and give it the food we have put before, in such a way that the food is at the first subtle; and when it begins to recover, let it be large.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	It is customary that the shoulder and leg should be reset in 40 hours after the injury, and then one should apply heat and medicines of ointments to heal the limb.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	If the structure is crooked and swollen, it may take 1 or 2 months to reset.
de la brisure du bras	of the broken arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, called the "humerus" and "radius", where one is small and supports the elbow; and the other is large, and is the one that moves towards the little bone. Sometimes the large humerus breaks alone, or the small one, and sometimes both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When small bones are broken, the restoration is light, and the healing; and when large bones are broken, the healing is difficult, and more painful than when they are broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is only the small bones that are broken, then if necessary, they should be slightly extended and aligned.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it is the large bones, then they should be stretched more forcefully; and extend them over the cushion, and tuck the thumb of the hand higher than the other fingers, and the small fingers lower than the others, and let the hairs cross over themselves, and the cushion in front of him higher than the hairs; then stretch the assistants' arms to the part outside of his hand, or to the elbow, and other assistants to the other above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	Then place the bones evenly, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if it breaks into pieces, put each in its place, and if there is no bone to hold it together, and you cannot restore it to its place, then make a new one as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the broken piece there is a wound, I have spoken of it to the chapter master; take care of it.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if in the beginning of the restoration there are abscesses, then use the cloth of cerate made of red oil and white wax, which is not too hard or too soft; and tie the cloth subtly, until the abscesses are soothed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	Then remove the splint, and apply the plaster of flour from the mill with abundance of urine, then place the splints, and set the one of the broken bone slightly outside, and a bit wider than the others; and make sure it has six splints or more: whether the broken bone is in one of the bones, or in two; and keep it slightly above the broken bone, and always less distant, as I said at the beginning of this chapter; and let the cloths that are on the broken bone be soft and moist, and not too hard or rough; and let the thread, with which it is tied, be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	Reward the limb and the joint after some time.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any evil accident comes to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, then you must raise the limb in hot water, until the itching is soothed; and let the limb rest without being tightly bound.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	Then continue the strapping, and if the joint is destroyed and the bones are exposed, or similar things, then apply it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the swelling cannot come to the limb because it is too tight, then you must soften it a little, and let it rest for some time, until the swelling has gone, and then strap it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things we have said come to harm, it will not last for more than 20 years.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	And then, they can put their hands to his neck, and make his neck even, and be careful of movement and stretching, and sleep on his back; and if this broken part is restored in 30 or 35 years, or possibly in 20 years, depending on the constitutions and compositions of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the breakage of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	And if it is broken in the back of the hand and we have little to do with breaks, then there will only be many tears.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	And when the bone of the hand is broken or crushed, it is necessary that the hairs be cut straight and evenly; then place the hand on the extended board, and extend the ministers' broken bones, and put them back in their places until they are well-jointed; and apply the plaster and bandages, if there are no wounds, then place a splint according to the size of the limb; and it should be wrapped in a linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the broken bone is in the middle of the palm, make a ball of cloth, and instruct the patient to press it against his broken palm; then wrap it with a long bandage, and place the splint as big as the palm of the hand, and strap it on, as it should be.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is on the other side, it is necessary to place one splint above and another below in the palm, so that the hand is open and straight, then tie it all around the hand, and bandage the joint between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture comes to one of the two, whether it is the thumb, then make it even as it should be; and strain with the palm, and if you see that you can put a straight small splint to lift the fractured bone and it does not move; and if the fracture is on the other side, as in the index or one of the others, then make it even and bind with the sound finger that is next; or you bind all together while holding them, which is better, or you put a splint above, as I have said; and pay attention to restoration and disposition of abscess, and take care of what comes, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken ribs
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	The ribs of the ribcage are often broken, and well one sees when they return in front and behind; and the restoration is such that one lies on the side of the broken rib, and the other outside.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the hairs grow on their face, then each minister extends his bandage to his equal part; and it is when the broken rib is inserted into the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the broken rib is close to the root of the ribcage, then one bandage is placed on top of the other on the side of the broken rib, and the other bandages outside the broken rib.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if it is near the groin, and then the limbs are above the groin, and the extension below; then place the bones evenly in both hands, as according to its natural shape, and then apply the plaster, and the bandage, and if there are no abscesses.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there are abscesses, let it be calmed then return to your work and care; the bandage is made in this way.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary to wrap it above the fractured bone in two or three layers, and let the excess remain, then turn the leg until the toes reach the root of the foot, and tie a long thread between the calf and the leg, outside the groin, and bring the end of the thread up; then turn back over the leg and over the calf, tie the bandage, and place one bandage on the bone of the leg; then fill the space between the leg and the calf with soft cloth to equalize the compression, then begin to bandage three or four times above the fracture; and as you go higher than the fracture, and less compress; then untie the two threads that you have tied between the leg and the calf, and the three bands that are above, then return to the top of the thread, until you reach below the knee; and if it does not move from its place, then leave it like that, then there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if there is, then dislocate it, and address what comes, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of the bone that can be felt, it should be removed if possible; and if not, then the limb should be cut and pulled apart; and the cure is as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And never break the ribs in such a way that one would put these stitches, as in the dislocation and arm; however, in such restoration, it does not hurt the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And it is cleaned when the ribs are restored at various times, sooner or later, according to the different constitutions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the passage of the genuine oil
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	It is said that in the passage of the genuine oil, there is little breakage, but it often causes pain.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, it is only a small cut or puncture, and it heals all wounds, whether large or small, and it feels good.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is done by applying equal pressure to the wound until it is closed as much as possible; then apply the ointment, and if you have skill, place a round bandage, and hold it as it should be, then warm all the preparations that we have said in other broken places, such as abscesses and similar things; apply to each accident what is appropriate until it is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the broken leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	It is said that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is called "mustelz" on the right side, and the other is called "foscile"; and all the fractures come as they do in the arm, and for this reason the restoration is also like that of the balanced arm, and the work is all there. And if both bones are broken together, then the leg returns to all its parts.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the "mustelz" bone is broken, it returns in front.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bone is broken, it causes great pain and can be seen well; and it returns outwards.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Therefore apply traction, and make it even, and tie the bandages equally; but always, it is necessary to check if the fracture is straight and well-aligned, and there are often many pieces, so that the traction is less and lighter; and adjust according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, take two strips of cloth that gently press on the leg from one side and the other, and are as long as the leg from the knee to the groin; then wrap them around the leg above and below, and tie them in the middle as well, and at this point the leg will not decline to the right or left, and thus it is good; and no one should administer the long strip of cloth, and if it is, and properly placed on the fracture where the wound is, and move the leg every day to see if there is an abscess or other accident; so the cure until it is healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the fracture of the bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle, there is no fracture, but the bones of the foot never have a fracture and are strong, and they have only been injured in several positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there is a fracture of the bones of the foot, and you see these bones protruding over each other, if you put your foot on the ground, as if it wanted to walk, then place your foot on theirs, where the bones are raised, then press them so that they return to their place; then apply the plaster and bandage above, and put a small cloth on the belly of the foot, then strap the foot evenly, then wrap bandages around it, and other things that you know how to do.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, if the joint is released, you will find the bones even, whether they are broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there are any of the two broken, if you restore them as we have said about the two bones of the hand; then place a splint along the length of the bone, and it should be slightly wider, then put the bandage as I have described, and strain evenly; and if there are two or three or more broken, place a splint according to their quantity, wrapped in a piece of linen, and strain the bandage away from the flesh of the bone, so that it does not stick.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said about other breaking injuries, as soon as we have said; and treat each accident according to how it should be treated.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the finger bone
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bones of the woman are broken, if the pain increases, then incline it to the part of the back, and hold it behind; then fill the wound with nature's cotton, and put in as much as possible; then lift the woman, and gently raise the back, and gradually pull out the cotton until it reaches the entrance of the nature, and the bone returns with the cotton; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has finished, return it, and do this for seven days or around: then the fracture will be restored, and if you see, take a bladder of wool, and tie a catheter to the end, and blow all the wool into the nature; then blow into the catheter until the wool is fully inflated inside: nature will return the fracture; then fill it with cotton, and leave it in this way for some time, until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the tooth of the little finger of the hand is broken, or of the woman, if it is reset as we have said in the bone of the shoulder; and these fractures are not hidden from him who puts his study and his use to this book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the fracture means in many positions the right way of restoration: understand therefore.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the wing, when it is broken, take a goose feather and blow the wing; then wrap bandages around it, and leave it for three days or until it heals inside, and it will be healed quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	of fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for one who has fracture with wound, even if it is large, such as the bones of the ribs or shoulder or similar, that they be cleaned immediately, so that the cleanings that we have said bear witness.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is clean, and if the remaining vitriol, then begin to restore the fractured bone in the same hour, or the next day, if there are no complications.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if complications arise, then leave the restoration until the next day, until the complications are soothed, and do not touch it on the following day or quarter, for you will bring about bad accidents.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	If the broken jaw appears above the curve of the cheek, then it is necessary to gently place it in your hands and extend it slightly.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension is not even enough to be placed in your hands, then use this iron instrument, which is seven or eight spans long, and its width depends on the size of the wound; and for this reason, it should be three or four spans wide, according to the amount of work needed for each treatment of a broken bone; and it should be round and a bit thick, so that it does not slip when pressing against the limb at your work, and it should be pointed in front and thick in the middle, like this:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called "palainche", because the patient's arm should be placed on top of the head of the bone; and the bone is struck once, as much as it returns, and they are evenly aligned against each other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is slight, and the instruments cannot well grasp the bone, then it is necessary to cut off the head of the bone until the instruments have the ability.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot reset the bone as we have said, then with a suitable instrument, such as a saw or chisel, to your power; then cut off what remains in the bone of hardness and small scratches.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is returned, and the pain is great afterwards, wait until it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	If it is in its natural place, then moisten the bandage with black stiff wine, and properly if it has been injured; and do not put anything oily on the wound or above it, that there be no pus and corruption; then administer these things as soon as you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover the bandage all around, according to the size of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not pressed with the break; many times this has been done by the foolish one, and has caused pus or death or corruption at any time; and let the strain be less and softer than other breaks.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that no evil accident has occurred, as we have said, and you relieve pain to the limb, then do not need to put above it; but wrap around, in place of above, hard cloths, and tie them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two hours that the wound is bleeding again, remove what you had put above it, and apply a healing ointment to the wound, such as Tetrapharmacum and similar.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you move the limb twice a day, in the morning and at night, as long as it is sound and healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limbs be arranged in such a way that the bow can move freely.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if they continue to move too much, and it cannot be fixed but remains broken bow, cut off the small pieces of bone, because it is necessary that you wash the wound with tent, and remove all these unwanted pieces that cause pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula comes to the limb, or another way of corruption, then you must treat it as described in his chapter before.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken, and open on the limb, like the bones of the thigh or shoulder, and other similar large limbs, do not remove it immediately, because many times they die, but leave it until it can heal; perhaps it will fall off after 20 days or 30, then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of the sudden blows that come to the soldering
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We often come after the healing of the breaker, precisely when it is near the joint, and the ugly thing to see is the shape of the limb; and by chance it cannot do its natural work.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Therefore take care then if it is fresh: if you administer stanching medicines, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocollis, acacia, and similar things, in such a way that you take any of these or all together, and make them with stanching wine or with abundant honey or with garlic; and place them on the mouth of the wound, and hold it firmly, and do not let it go in your hands for a long time; and then dislodge it, and start another, until the swelling is removed; or you hold a piece of plaster well made; because the property of the plaster is that it removes all the inflammation from the limbs; and if the swelling is already hard like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, if the copper above, and making the superfluity apparent; or you reset it with any razor, until it is removed, and care for it until it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	a weak limb that is after the garrison
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone is restored, and remains after the limbs are weak and subtle, it happens for many reasons: one is because it was tied too tightly, and was not tied as it should have been; or because there were too many bandages, and could not come to the movements of the limb; or because of too much swelling; or because of too great movements, not in its hour; or because it has little blood in its body, then it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the pain less, and make the body tense, until the swelling is not multiplied in it; and administer baths, and give joy and rest; then put poultice on the limb, so that the poultice attracts to the great movement, and the swelling often of high temperature, as long as the movement goes to the limb; and returns to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	a crooked limb after healing
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limbs are twisted after restoration, and the bones are broken open, and the form of the limb is ugly, however, it does not matter its natural appearance: if one believes the folk who say that one should break the limb completely, and many have done this in our land; and these practices are blamed, and great harm comes, and perhaps death; however, if the dislocations and twists are fresh, then it is necessary to apply hot water or softening herbs, such as willow bark, roots, and melilot, and similar things; and the mollifying plaster, such as well-made diaquilon, and you take the willow bark powder, and mix it with goose fat or sunflower oil, and make a plaster on; or you take figs, and grind them with linseed, and similar medicines that soothe the pain.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And never is the dislocation caused by continuously and excessively rubbing with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And allow movement to the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the twisting is awake and hard, like stone, and it needs to be removed with a knife, if it covers the bone, with a slight delicate incision; and put on a poultice and bandage in the care.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to none, it must now be returned to its proper place.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if it is delayed, the joint swells, and if it is reset, it may be put back in the wrong place; for it does not matter that it is moved to its correct position: many times it brings on spasms and other pains; however, when this happens, first soothe the injury, then leave it until the abscess is relieved; then raise the limb with hot water and oil, then gently reset it, and care for each member as it comes back to its proper place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	I have ordered the chapters on the dislocations of the shoulder joint from head to foot.
des mandibules	of the mandibles
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	There are two ways in which the mandibles can be dislocated: either they are slightly displaced from their place and somewhat softened; or they are completely dislocated and hang down towards the ground, preventing the mouth from being closed and covering the tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it often returns to its proper position in several positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is completely and accomplished, then you must reset it quickly and not gently; and in this way, the minister should hold the head of the painful part with one hand at the root of the dislocation of the mandible within the mouth, if the dislocation is on both sides; and the other hand should be outside to make it even; and command the patient to soften his jaws and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And when the dislocation returns to its place evenly.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if it is difficult to reset, especially when both mandibles are together, then apply hot and oil, as we have said, until it is lightly reset; do not delay in resetting, as we have mentioned.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are reset evenly, and the jaw pain is relieved by softening, then apply a cloth moistened with a hot rose oil and wax mixture; then bind it lightly with soft bandages; let the patient sleep on their back, with their heads between two pillows, so they do not move to the left or right, nor try to move much, but eat light food, until the pain is gone, and the jaws are healed; then change what they want to eat lightly, and do not force them to open their mouth to chew and drink, until the jaw is fully healed and healthy.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	If the two mandibles cannot be reset to their proper position within an hour and are not converted back to their usual place, then it may lead to fevers and swelling, and possibly diarrhea, and possibly vomiting of bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	And when you see this, then it is a sign of danger; and many times those who have had it die within fourteen days.
de la forcelle	of the shoulder
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The shoulder cannot be dislocated from the side of its own continuity and the other, and it is not reset once dislocated, and one can feel it well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is such that the patient should lie on their back with their arms extended; then press the joint gently into your palm, and it will return; then apply the plaster and bandage, and hold it in place; if the one who is facing the side cannot be dislocated, then if they are not, and if they are dislocated once, then reset the joint as we have said; then apply the plaster and bandage, and hold it in place, and command the patient to rest until they are healed; and thus the same is done with the shoulder, when it is free from its joint.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	There are three ways in which the shoulder is dislocated: one is that it is dislocated at the part of the acromion above; and the second is at the part of the pis; and sometimes dislocated at the part above, and this happens rarely; and does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, and does not dislocate inside for the nerves; and many times dislocated upwards towards the acromion, especially to those who have little fat, because to these it is painful; to those who have enough fat, it is painful, and returns painfully.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance, some men have a blow or a crushing, and the shoulder swells with an abscess, and they think it is dislocated by this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	Then you must examine it, until you are certain; and then the treatment begins.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And it is known that the dislocation is when it is below the acromion, and it sets apart the sick shoulder from the healthy one, and you will find between them a difference; and you will find at the top of the shoulder a hollow, and below the acromion the top of the shoulder, like as if it were one bone; and it cannot move its hand to its neck, nor any movements; and thus, if it is dislocated above, it is not hidden, for you will see it clearly below; and this way of dislocation is not hidden, when it is new, or if the pain is in the top.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	The method is that the assistant lifts the injured arm upwards, then places their fingers below the joint, and forces the joint back into place from above; the assistant lifts the arm and extends it upwards, then removes it quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if she does not come as we have said afterwards, then it is necessary to bathe the injured arm in hot water; and the assistant should rub and soothe it with a decoction of althea and fenugreek and melilot in hot water, and apply it; then place the injured arm on its back, and place a cloth evenly, neither too soft nor too hard, under the joint, then place the foot of the shoulder on the cloth, and gently lift the shoulder and draw the hand away from the injured arm; another assistant should wash the head of the shoulder so that it does not move downwards; this shoulder is now completely healed, and if you see that the dislocation returns according to this method: then you must find someone who is stronger than the injured arm; and stand on the side of the body, and push the shoulder away from the joint, and lift the joint upwards, so that the injured arm hangs down; and another assistant should draw the hand of the injured arm down towards the stomach.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the pain is too light, you can move it with anything heavy, and the dislocation now returns.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And the resetting can also be done in another way: and it is that you place a long, thin piece of wood in the ground, which the patient should hold as if it were a staff, and not too thick or too sharp; then it should be placed outside the dislocated joint, but with cloth underneath, and the joint should be stretched out as far as possible on the other side, and the joint will return to its place quickly; and if it does not return for all these things we have said, then do this cure: take a piece of wood that is two arms wide and four fingers thick, which has a point that enters from the front outside the shoulder, in this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then tie above the shoulder with soft cloths, which was not too tight to cause pain, then remove it from under the dislocation; and extend one arm over the long one, and tie the help sus the long one, and the arm at the head of the hand, then put the arm over the wide end of an arrow, and hold the hands down, and let the body hang from the other side: the joint is now healed.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is healed in any way, it is necessary to place a soft cloth under the dislocation, then apply the plaster mixed with flour from the mill, with incense and a little egg, over the whole shoulder and around, then remove the plaster from under the dislocation evenly, and turn the limb back onto the plaster, and embrace the hand to its neck, and let the hands remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he change it little, until the limb is comfortable, for it will heal faster; and then change it after five or seven days, and move it; and if it is stiff and not softened, then it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is very strong due to moisture that has come, or for another reason, it is necessary that you administer cautery at three points, as it is placed in front or in the chapter on cautery.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all of this, and it dislocates after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift the arm up, then cut or stretch or soften the nerve at the head of the shoulder; and cut that the joint has never been healed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that is by the ankle and the knees, or behind, is made by pushing and stretching of hands, and there is another remedy; and treat until they are healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing the member becomes swollen and still moves, then use the remedy many times, until that swelling is alleviated, and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	That the joint of the shoulder is dislocated at points, and repeatedly dislocates; and it has been dislocated from all parts, and even in front and behind, and the dislocation is not returned, for one can see and feel it well; and it dislocates according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the dislocated shoulder with the healthy one, make sure to see it openly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is broken, and cannot move the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary to reset it as soon as possible when the shoulder blade comes, for if the shoulder blade comes, it would be painful to reset; and perhaps it cannot be reset entirely at all, especially when it is in the back; it is worse than other dislocations, and causes more great pain, and perhaps it kills the patient.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is, when it is such that one can reset it, that you extend your hand to their two hands; and their arms are spread out, and their hands on either side of the shoulder, outside and inside, and push the joint back together, or at the root of their palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, then it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and trusts the root of the palm which is misaligned.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if he does not want to return to its place, then apply strong extension; and it is that two ministers extend the arm, and they hold the arm with two ministers, so that it does not move during extension; then turn the arm from both sides, then when you have wrapped a double long and wide cloth; and when you see the joint at the joint, if there is any oil to soften the joint, then press the joint together, until it returns; and when it is in its place, then put a dry plaster with some honey on top, and press it together, and can the arm against the back of the bad shoulder, and leave it for some time, then remove it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	If the joint is firm in its place, then release the limb and leave it; if you see that the joint does not hold well, then restart the bandage and the limb, and leave it thus for some time, until it is firmly put back; then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	If he feels pain after the resetting of the joint, and it moves, then bathe and rub him well, and press until it is soothed; or place a piece of fat lamb grease on the joint, leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and put him in a bath; when he urinates, rub the joint immediately, then place the grease back, and put him in a bath again; do this twice or three times until he is healed; and if you see, then place a piece of moist, warm chaff with butter on it, and strain it; it will return to its normal position.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The joint of the hand is dislocated, and the return is lighter than other joints. Therefore, it should be quickly returned to its place as soon as it is dislocated, whether the skin is swollen or there is an abscess.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And the return is that you place the misaligned hand on a table, and extend the fingers of the hand, and place the palm so that it aligns with the appearance of the joint, and press it until it returns fully. Then, you should check if it is properly aligned; therefore, place the misaligned side of the hand on a table for extension and return.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, put the hairs on the back of your hand over the table, and the eyes put their hand over the appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, it is well; if not, apply the soothing plasters and let it rest until you can try again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if it cannot be borne, and you cannot put it back in place after some time, the joint will remain twisted; and do not try to straighten anything until the hand is wet, and nothing can be stretched at all: then cut the nerves or the artery; otherwise, there is no other means than to stretch by fire through the skin, and perhaps it is not worth it.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, put the plaster that we have mentioned above, then strap it and leave it for 3 days, then remove it and leave it thus.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it cannot move well, and there is no swelling, then apply hot wool, and rub until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the two fingers
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Fingers are not dislocated at any part of the hand, never at the back of the palm or on the wrist; then place the two fingers, and maintain the dislocation with your fists until it returns, then support the head of the finger, and move it towards the part where it is disjointed; and leave it for 2 days, and then put it in place; and tie it as we have said, and remove the bandage the next day, and move it, and reattach it; and do this often, until it is tight, and do the same if it is dislocated on the wrist of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed; and do the same when it is dislocated in other parts.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	the dislocation of the spine from the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spine of the back or neck is dislocated, and there are many dislocations, there is no cure, for the patient dies from the pain.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs are that the excretions jump suddenly without volition, and they cannot hold it, and often all the limbs are softened, or the two legs or the two arms or one; and often the spine moves to the fourth part; that which moves to the back is called "gillbositez": the cure is that you reward the gillbositez if it comes from childhood: if there is no cure or healing for the whole.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And those that come from falling or from similar things, they used the old methods of treatment with great words, but I have abbreviated them according to my intention and have formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the case of a fracture that comes from the front, there is no engineering or healing; and so with the one that comes directly to the second rib, and one cannot cure it other than by the proper one that comes to the back, as I said; and it is that the wounds should be extended over its face in one place evenly, and have some strain away from him, that he does not swell; then make one bandage at the head in earth form, and the other at the feet, and tie a ligature outside the fracture, and the other as hips, and as shoulders, and as knees; and the assistant should bind the ligatures, the ones at the head and the others at the feet, among the two bandages; and they should be well fastened, the bandage as we have said, and the fingers put its palms over the spine properly, until it returns.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return by this cure, take a long board of three arms in length, and twist it out of shape, and place the hairs on one side, and put the head of the board from one side, then place the middle of the board on the spine; and put the mirrors his feet on the other end of the board, and press well, until it returns to its place; and if you see, do the same with the other side.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And you should tie two ropes to the head of the shoulder of one arm, and on both sides of the feet, and between each rope, outside and inside, a long palm; and in each rope, a small hole, where the turner goes, and so that the ropes are firmly on the ground, so that they do not move; and between each two ropes, there is one turning rope, along with the other turners, and two small ropes of a long palm to turn the turner; and then tie the ligament that is among the tendons to the turner's head, and the other ligament to the other turner's feet, and each minister turns his turner along the entire ligament, and the master puts the spine even as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	When it is even, apply a desiccating plaster with abundant sulfur, and then pour in, and then place the end of a tablet of three fingers long, which holds the neck of the vertebrae and the part of the spine healthy, then tie it with a bandage as we have said, and use subtle pressure until they are healed; and if something comes at the end of health, then administer medicines that are softening and astringent, with the remedy that we have mentioned before; and never give one piece of plaster, and never come to appear in the back spine of the back, and pay attention that this is dislocation; and it is the bone that opens, because one should not have presumption: perhaps it would cause death.
des dislocations de la hainche	of shoulder dislocations
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	It is said that the joints of the shoulder and the joints of the back do not come out except for dislocations only, and they do not come out as with other joints; and the joint of the back is dislocated in four parts: inside and outside, and front and back; and more inside then, and slightly dislocated in front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of this dislocation inside is such that when one joins the crooked leg with the straight one, it is longer and more open than the healthy ones, and cannot bend its knee to the fire; and the legs that are swollen with abscesses are those that are located below, because the cause of the belly comes from there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of one who comes after this is that this accident is opposite to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of one who has come before are that he stands well on his leg according to completion; however, he does not double over with pain in the groin, and if one wants to make him walk, he cannot do so, and retains his urine, and swells the ankle, and when he walks, he passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of one who has come after are that he cannot spread his groin, nor bend, and his leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the shoulder is dislocated to the side of the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The treatment of this kind of dislocation is that you wait for the dislocation to heal, and it stays according to its condition, if there is no cure; and there is no need for him to have presumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in this kind of dislocation where the dislocation is fresh, and there are four ways of dislocation, you must quickly return the joint, and extend and bend it, and move it to the left and right; perhaps if it returns, and there is no need for other treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this manner, you must apply one strong minister, and bend the leg strongly at two joints, or one that is tied above the knee; and other ministers extend their hand above in a similar manner as they push their hands out of their sockets, then pinch the skin of the back; and some grip the head of the limb; and stretch up and down all at once, until the pain is lifted from the ground at once, and remains suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common for four similar cases, and if the dislocation has returned as we have said, then it is well.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If not, then you must treat its similar case. When the dislocation is at the pectoral, then you should support the misaligned part on its healthy side, then place the ligament at the base of the ribcage, and the limb that is outside the arm, then extend the ligament above the arm, and towards the shoulder; then take other ministers to grasp the large rib of the misaligned ribcage, and extend it back into its place: if it returns to its limb now; and this method of dislocation is less severe than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot hold it in this manner that we have said, then it is necessary to tie the two hairs of the injured leg together with a strong rope above the two heels, and above the two knees, and let the injured leg be stretched out two fingers more than the other; then hang it suspended by the chief of a stick, and let the other arm be suspended from the ground; then command the minister to grasp the base of the neck, and let another minister hang with the injured leg, who grasps the neck properly, for the joint is now approaching.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocation is on the other side, then grasp the injured leg, as we have said in the case of gout, and hold the rope properly above the injured leg and also at the feet; then put two bands, one at the head and the other at the foot, then fold the band between the thighs of the injured leg in the proper form; and wrap moist cloths around it, so that it does not become stiff, then extend each minister towards him, and the master places the dislocation equal to his hand.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, place it on the table, and press it as we have said in the gilbosite, and cut off the hairs on the clean side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the injured leg quickly, and as I have said; and place the fingers of your pain on the other side of the injured limb, then press with the other hand, and extend it down towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is in the back, it is not necessary to extend the injured leg downwards, nor to lift it up, but it should be as it was when it was dislocated in the back, as we have said for the lying-in of both hips; and it should be on its face, and the limb extended as we have said before, and one must press on the joint at the table; and it will be perfect when the injured leg extends its legs, and they are even; then support the knees, and put the poultice, and the bandage of a bundle, so that the hip does not move; and let it rest for three or four days, then remove it, and put the poultice on; and if you see that they are even, then the bandage, as before, and let it rest for three days; then remove it, and make the limb strong again, until the limb is comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the shoulder dislocation
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The shoulder is dislocated in three ways: that is to say, from the inside and outside, and behind; and it does not dislocate from the front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the signs are that you command the patient to bend his leg at the knee, and if he cannot straighten it at the knee, then it is dislocated; and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and put your back against his face, and put his foot on your feet; then take his shoulder to your palms, and bring it between your fingers, then bend the two sides of the shoulder correctly; and another minister extends his foot, until the shoulder returns to its place, and the signs are that he holds his leg at the knee lightly; and put the plaster on it, and make the leg and knee rub together strongly for three or four hours, then release it; and do not work on the patient again until the limb is comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	If the limbs are not properly aligned, administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the back, until they are healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the ankle.
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The feet are never splinted and never fully dislocated, neither inside nor outside.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the bone is displaced, and it feels tender to the touch at the part where it is dislocated: the swelling is slight, and one should gently extend it slightly when it is splinted only.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is dislocated completely, one should first straighten the bone correctly, and hold it firmly with one's hands on the leg, above the knee; then pull the tendon to you with your right hand, and then with your left hand twice, then extend it upwards, and gently tap the tendon above; do this twice as we have said, both bending and pulling the tendon; if it returns, it is good; if not, repeat the procedure, for it will return; and if it cannot return in this way, place the dislocated bone on its back on the ground, and firmly fix the tendon between its thighs, so that it does not bend the bone; then bandage the tendon with a cloth, and other ministers extend the tendon to your hands or to the injured limb, so that they can hold the tendon while stretching; then extend all the ministers equally, and the tendons should be held between the thighs of the dislocated bone to keep it in place while stretching; then put the mires evenly on the dislocation at your hands, and other ministers bandage the leg cleanly outside, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when she goes to the point, put the plaster and make it wet above, and the stain forms, and tie the leg to the thigh, and keep the nerves that are above the knee behind, so that the joints are not too tight; then leave her for two or three days, and if the joints break, remove the plaster; then let her go on the third day or fourth, and defend against the pain for four days; and if she goes before that time, it is not sure that she will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes, it is necessary that you calm it down, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
des dois	For the fire cautery, instruct
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the shoulder is dislocated, if it is properly extended and moved, it is a simple matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is not in any way towards the back or the front, then you should make the patient sit with their arm extended straight out or on a table, and place your hand over the joint, then press firmly until it realigns; and when it is aligned and there is no opening, place a board under the elbow at the same angle as the shoulder, then press firmly for three days, then release; and let it rest until it is healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wounds and of dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound comes with dislocation, and one wishes to restore it, often the pain is great: if you are not presumptuous in the cure, and do not know the art well, and have not used it for a long time, and are not merciful and slow, and not harsh; at the beginning of things, gently treat abscesses, and leave the pain in God’s hands, if you see no hope of health; and when you see hope, then now reset the member to its place, as long as the abscesses are gone; and when the member is in place, then administer things to heal abscesses, and cure the wound, as it should be, with frequent dressings; and if with dislocation there is a fracture, and small bones are broken, then remove them, and do what we have said in simple diseases; and guard against entering the path of fear, as I have said, for it is better for you according to your Creator, and for the knowledge of your armor and body.
Amen	1. For the fire c
