O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	Oh, most holy sons, I have completed this book that is the end of the science of medicine, and I have filled it with its contents, and I have made the end by its explanations and by its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is fortified in our region and is distorted in all things, therefore it has perished the science and has been lost, and nothing remains of it except the small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this comes the error and the vanity, and the minds are closed and the knowledge is distant.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems to me that I can revive this treatment along with the order of exposure and declaration and abbreviation; and I will bring together the forms of cauterizing instruments, and other tools of the work with the aid of declaration and preparation of it, as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because of this reason that no good master of hands is found in our time, the art of medicine is extended.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for him who enters into this to surpass in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until he knows the judgment of the limbs, and their forms and conjunctions and separations of all, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and muscles and the number of joints, and the movement and rest of them, and the source of their issue.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And because Hippocrates says that with the hand alone it is not much, and with work it is little; and equally in the art of manual labor.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you at the beginning of this book that those who are not familiar with the things mentioned before, if they attempt to practice without knowledge and cause harm to men; so I have often seen many of those who meddle in this science and abandon their science and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a foolish woman who cut out an abscess of scrofula or breast of a woman, and cut the arteries of the breast; because so much blood issued out that the woman died between her hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	And another case that treats a stone from a man's eye, and the stone was large; it took with it a piece of the bladder, and died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called for the extraction, and saw the position of the injury and the size of the stone, and if it was cut, it would have died.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another case that took in care the Duke of our land who had his leg broken, and with the breaker he got a wound; and the doctor restrained the fracture above the wound with stitches for a long time, and did not let the wound drain, and so it ended thus; and he commanded that it not be removed; and so it remained until the leg was completely infected and the foot and came to destruction.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and he urged me to come to dislocate his leg; and when I heard it was dislocated, it was in a place and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But all ways of the corruption were already confirmed in the member, and it could not be healed; and the corruption did not cease to spread throughout the member until the member was completely lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another way that crushed the abscess and became putrid, and then inflamed due to the evil of its lord.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For putridity, when it is free from melancholic humor, does not need more than to be touched by iron if it is in a place where one can completely remove everything that is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	Therefore, very dear son, you should know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: first, where there is fear and danger in many positions; and I will show in each chapter of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Therefore, it is important that you keep this in mind, so that the wicked do not speak evil of you if you take up your arms firmly and courageously, and use the best means so that by the grace of God you come to salvation and be saved; and let go of diseases that cause great suffering; and remove the weapons that cause doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galen says in some of his admonitions: "Do not take on the care of a very ill patient unless you are called a foolish one.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have divided this treatment into three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters are about fire cauteries and non-fire medical cautery, and the chapters are ordered from the head to the feet; and about the forms of instruments, and the irons for cauterizing, and all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapters are about cutting and incising, and about wounds, and about the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and the chapters are ordered and the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is ordered from the head down to the feet, and the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	As we remember the work, it is necessary for me to tell the quality of the help and new harm of each condition.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality of help and new harm is the longest speech and most subtle science and hidden secrets; and for this reason many wise men spoke about it and agreed to it; and I do not speak much about it because I lengthen it.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cauterization helps universally in every condition where there is matter, whether the condition is hot with matter or dry without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry weather, they all agreed that the fire cautery is a great help; but others said the opposite, that the fire cautery is only helpful for diseases that come from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the natural heat of fire is hot, and should not be cured with heat or dryness; and those who said the opposite claimed that the fire cautery helps greatly with hot and dry diseases that come from the bodies of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of man and its moisture to the heat of fire, you will see that the body is hot.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have never found it by experiment.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And no one interferes with it except those who have experienced it, and who know from long experience the chapter on cauteries, and the diversity of human constitutions, and their dispositions and causes of diseases, and the symptoms and space of time; other constitutions we do not fear, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the symptoms gathered and agreed on the cauterization.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, my children, that cauterization with fire is one of the secrets of cures, and of greater good than cauterization with hot medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For the fever is simple, and does not come more than to the member that is cooked, and does not harm other members if not named.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The fiery medicines come from one member to another by distancing, and bring diseases of the sick member; and by chance it happens that the evil one fever for its high price and because of the goodness of its substance does not harm, if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this I have found by experiment and by the length of service and study that I have put in the art, and it has been above the truth of things; and because I excuse the length of speech, for I do not like to give you the secret which is hidden or fire, and the quality of the work, how it breaks diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; now receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they should be made in what degree the cautery should be done, and they ask for it.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that the cautery is beneficial in all cases, because the harm that comes from it is removed by the help of the cautery; and indeed if the cautery is for necessary pain, other than that which cannot wait until the greatest harm comes to the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think, dear son, as the foolish people do; for to the disease that is healed by cautery there is no return; and they say so because it is not exactly as they think, because cauteries are only medicine that moves the complexion, and dries up the humors that are the cause of pain, and is better medicine for its immediate effect, and for the virtue of its work and its authority.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And the only thing that is good is that the disease comes at a time when the body and its condition are strong; and they are gathered in it the superfluities by the acquisition of foods and similar things, unless you cauterize them in the place where there is little superfluity and moisture, as cauterizing with dense for the pain, and similar things, and the pain does not return much; but this happens little.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauterizing is called the last resort of medicine, and it is seen; but they do not believe that cauterizing is valid after medicine, but their intentions are false, and cauterizing is the last resort of medicine because when we administer methods of treatment in any disease and they do not work, then we administer the cautery, and it is worth it.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, it is well known that cauterization is one of the main methods of medicine, not according to the intention of misguided people.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that a cauterizing instrument of gold is more effective than iron, and they only said further that because of the quality of gold and the purity of its substance; and they said that the wounds of cautery do not fester, but I have found that this is not true, as I have experienced, and I have found that it is different in some people; and a gold cauterizing instrument is more effective than iron, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And when you heat an instrument of gold, you should not be too concerned about its color turning yellow, and it has already somewhat cooled; and if it is heated too much, then they put it in the fire; and thus it has enough precaution.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason, we use fire cauterization that we have prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or I have ordered this chapter on the shoulder joints to be written separately, for it is easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	oil cauterization
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cauterization is useful for moisture and cold above the skull, and it is done for two reasons: due to a disease called "soda", and due to many humors that descend from the shoulder joints, and to the ears, and because of many dreams and toothache and throat pain, and indeed for all diseases that come from cold as paralysis and soda and apoplexy and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the hairs should be removed by a solvent medicine, changing the skin III or IV times, according to the virtues and the age and the custom of the hair, as much as it can suffer; and then repeat the skin of the hair.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	Then place the cross between your hands, and put your hands on top of it; after that, put the root of your palm on the root of his nail between his two eyes; and when you see blood coming out, then heat the cautery which is called "olivare", from which this form is:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place the bone in its socket with ink, and gradually pull and hold your hand gently in restoring; then remove your hand slowly, and reward the limb if you see the bone slightly; and if you do not see it, start the cauterization again until you see the bone as I have told you; after take a little cotton, and put it in awe and soft cotton inside, and place on the limb, and leave it for three hours; after put a moist cloth on burning; and leave it until the wound is healed; then care for the wound called "tetrafarmaçon" until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the ancients said, that the longer one keeps the wound open, the more it purges; and for this reason, it helps to heal.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And none of these say that one should cool the cauterizer so much that a part of the bone is burned, and then reopen what has been burned from the bone, and be healed.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And the others say that one should cool the cauterizer so much above, and if one removes a piece of bone as wide as the spindle that women put in their hair to let out the humors, and then keep the wound open for a long time; afterwards, one must cure and suture.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two methods of cauterization do not seem to be good in all cases, unless in some people where there is a view of fear; and I think that I should leave it; for the affected person is weakened by continuous solutions of nature, as we testify in other members; and indeed when the affected part is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterization is safer and milder for me, and of this use I work in such cases.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the ancient pain of the main
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When in all cases the main pain comes from chronic pain that lasts a long time, one should use remedies such as years and pills called "cochie", and purging of the head and eyes and plasters; and if one does the cauterization that we have previously mentioned, it is not good.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	If the patient is of strong constitution and not too cold, then cauterize with that fire which we have mentioned above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est I leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After cauterizing each horn of the head to the bone as we have mentioned before, and cauterize with the vessel which is called "vasselz"; and place it in the place where one puts suctions; and raise your hand so that you do not see jusc’a l’os: the pain from this cauterization is much greater than others, and I will speak about it later; and it is necessary that the cauterizations of the horns be more subtle than that with which one cauterizes the middle of the head, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	for the fire cautery
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	when in one part of the head sudden pain comes, and the disease extends to the ear, and the patient is purged by medicines that change the body, and other cures have been done as I said in the division of diseases, and nothing helps: then you must cauterize according to two methods, that is with a hot or fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	if the cauterization with medicine is that you grasp a small piece of iron, and remove the skin and coat it with a little bit of the patient's blood, and then make a temple or where the pain is located in such a way that you can replace the piece of iron outside the skin; and when it is replaced, hold and secure it well and leave it for twelve hours; then remove it and treat further with a poultice of bread, and leave the wound for two or three days; then put on a soft cloth dipped in boiling water.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment of burns until they are healed; and if you see that some medicines cause blisters, which I have written or prescribed to treat such medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The fire cautery is done in this way.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cauterizing iron in this form:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a clove or it has a little hook, and in the middle a small appearance; and put it on the painful part, and hold your hand and gently press the iron until half of the surface is burned; then lift your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is before, and bleeds abundantly.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After placing cotton on a silk thread and putting it on the limb for three days; then applying a poultice of bread crumbs, and treating the wound with ointment until it is healed; and if you wish to cauterize this wound with the cauterizing iron called "cultellare", apply it at the point, and be careful not to cover the artery in this wound which is not ancient.
de emigraine	of the wound
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat the wound as we have previously described in the divisions of diseases, and it does not improve, and you see that the cauterizing iron before mentioned does not cause much pain and does not suffocate the patient, then it is necessary to extinguish the cauterizing iron called "cultellare" until it is cool; and then apply it to the limb, one line of half a finger's length from the bone, and with your hand take it once, and make sure you do not cover the artery and that it does not come into contact with the bone; and be careful of the mandible which moves when turned, and the nerves should only have regard to the movement and that spasm does not cause pain, and be careful of the bleeding from the artery when it is cut, or if it is cut with great fear and immediately to the one who does not know, and who has not experienced; and leave the work in this way; but I will tell you how to stop the bleeding when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it is mentioned in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this fire cauterization does not suffice for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize it at the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you see, administer the cauterization that we have said or from the chapter of extraction of the artery, with the cauterization that has two knives; and this fire cauterization is better than the other and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain in the ears from cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain comes in the ear from cold, and remedies have been applied and other treatments that we have said in the division, and the pain does not move, then warm this cauterization called "puncture", of which is the form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait X poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After carefully removing all the skin around the ear, where the pain is felt on both sides, and then move away a little from the base of the ear, as you have marked the point of entry; and apply X punctures around each ear; after healing the ear until it is healthy.
de la torture de la bouche	of the mouth torture
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture that must be treated with caution is no more than those that move from the mouth, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not apply cauterization to similar things that come from scarring and spitting of blood.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you care for this similar torture that moves from a stream of tears and mucus from the chief and gargling, and it does not work, then it is necessary to cauterize the pain with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and the other a little later the temple, and the third in the adjustment of the two lips; and put the cauterizer in the part that opens healthy, and make the cauterizer on the chief of the ear above a little bit outside the horn of the chief, and another in the temple as long as a pin; and leave the cauterizer so much up that half of the courage is burned; and this is the form of the cauterizer:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it is similar to the cauterizing knife that we have placed before, but it is a bit more subtle and it is necessary that the knife be a bit larger; afterward, treat the wound as I have previously said, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres: II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said, and it does not improve, and the pain does not have fever, then make four cauterizations: two on each of the two corners of the head, one on the forehead, and one on the part called "vasselz" as we have previously said, and the back cauterization is on the mouth of the stomach; and treat it as we have said before.
de litargie	of laziness
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease, it is necessary to give the patient large and modified brain pills; then remove the main part of the disease, and place the sinapi emplaister on the occipital [back of the head], which is written or treated with emplaisters; and this is the way of the cauterization: if you do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is thus healthy, good; and if not, make three cauterizations of the emis [veins] at the head in descending just above the collarbone, and space one and a half [inches] between each cauterization; and the cure as with the others, and if you have seen to place, and the diseases are suffering, make one cauterization in the middle; and if the work is, two more on the two horns, and the cure until it is healthy; and let the cauterizations called "olivare", as I have previously said.
de la froidor dou chief	of the cold of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary to clean the head of years and of the sweat that we have previously mentioned; after that, rub the head of the painful joint, then make a fire cautery on the head and under each horn, and behind and three times on the spine of the neck; and if you have more trouble, and the skin is wet and the pain is intense, and the disease is not healed, then make four cauteries on the spine of the back; and leave it until the worst is over, and remove your hand; after the treatment until it is healed, and let the cauteries that are called «olivare» be as we have previously mentioned.
de l’epilempsie	Of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use cauterization except for those that are fleamatic, and it is necessary to first modify the brain of years and other treatments that we have said in the division when the pains are great and suffering from lack of medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a child who cannot bear the pain, give them gargling and chewing, modifying the brain often with good meat; then give them the medicine in the middle of the head, and do the cauterization according to what we have said before, and the cauterization on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the pains are far and suffering, give them cauteries as I have said to those who have paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be olive oil according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the pain is intense, then perform the delicate cauterization as follows:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to melancholy, the excess or corrupted moisture is causing a large flux, then use the pointed cauteries as we have said for those who are paralyzed.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to melancholy, the excess or corrupted moisture is declining towards melancholy, and the blood is watery with pain, then give something to drink that cleans the brain, according to what it is before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After relieving the pain of the shoulder; after making a good bandage, like a circle, and placing it on the shoulder; and if the pains subside, and are held well from all sides; then present the liniment, and use old beeswax; and heat it gently in fire, so that the patient can bear it; after emptying the circle from inside placed on the shoulder, and let it cool; and do this for the shoulder once a week with different governance good until they are healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	When you see the fire cautery, make pricks all around the cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This method of cautery moistens the brain excessively; and then place on it moistened cotton in lard and goose grease.
de l’awe des eulz	of the eyes'
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the eye first comes to the eyes by the signs that I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give to drink the remedy cleansing the head, and keeping it from all moisture, and let it sweat or bathe several times a day empty.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After that command him to turn his head, and apply the cautery on the head, and give him two cauteries on the two temples simultaneously, or in one; and cover all the cautery with the veins and arteries that are outside the skull, and so is the cautery long according to the width of the temple; and keep from bleeding of blood, and if you see too much blood coming out, then stop it with a cloth.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in making incisions, how you should do it; and never burn or cauterize anything outside the two lower bones.
dou cors des larmes	the course of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are above the veins, or below the arteries that appear to be in the appearance of the main, and it is seen that it is superfluous cold fluid, then the cauterizing agent that I mentioned at the beginning of the work should be applied: one cautery on the forehead, and two cauterizations on the two temples, and two cauterizations outside the two lower bones; and if there is more, then the sagely cauterizes above the sore with every small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	through the path of tears through the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat the patient according to what we have said in the division, and it does not improve, then drink three bad-tasting concoctions; after that, apply heat to the head, and cauterize or cauterize with the cautery of the chapter; and make two cautery burns called «clavilis» on the two sinews, a little below the ears; and be careful not to cover the artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cauteries called «clavilis»:
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize with the cauteries of this cautery called «olivare».
de coi ci est li forme:	of this form:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that you have made two cautery marks as long as the arrows are; and do not leave your hand except until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	the hairs that do not oil
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	There is no case where the hairs of the oiled ones are converted to parchment, and they oil, and it is made that cautery is done in two ways: namely by fire, or by burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow long and even, then put the hairs in your hand; after, hold the eyes above the paper of the eyebrows a figure that is as such as the full moon, and be the beginning of the sign above the hairs; then put cotton moistened in oil and musk on the oil, then heat the cauterizing iron:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterize on the figure that you have marked a little and little more times, that the curse be in the right place; and the signs of the health of the work are that you see the paper retreating, and the hairs raised to the point of the oil; then lift your hand, and leave thus three hours, then put cotton moistened in butter as long as the burn is healed; after the dressing until it is healthy.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after this, the hairs come back, and the paper is softened, then begin the cautery on the same spot again, as you did before; and if the hairs are missing, then cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural level, and is even, and do not prick at the hairs with it.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The cautery of medicine burning is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a parchment in the shape of the leaf of mint; then take French soap and live wax, one of each, and grind them together well; and apply it hotly, so that it does not cool, then spread it on the form you have made as the leaf of mint, and put it on the eyes; and if the patient only holds in one eye, then cover both equally; and put cotton wool moistened with oil behind the eye; and let the patient look at the medicine, and press the point and move it every time the patient feels the burning sensation of the medicine, for it feels like a fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then take the medicine to your mouth.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the blistering is passed, lift the limb up, and reward yourself if you see the paper raised as it was raised by constraint of fire or by incision; and if it is thus, then it is good.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, then apply the medicine again to the limb or the medicine has not worked, until your work is even, and your eyes are fixed; then put on cotton moistened in oil as long as the wounds are chosen, after care the limb of the burn which is called «dyafenis» and others, until they are healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you are uncertain about your work, be careful to stay within the boundaries of your craft, lest you not heal with those tools.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes soft afterward, and the hair prick at the oil, then begin the medicine again on that one which has been softened by the proper paper, as you have done before; after healing, until they are healed; and this is the form of the fume of the mercurous:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And since the hairs of men are varied in size and smallness, and according to what your constraints may be; and do not reply with the wrong way to that one who has studied this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	The care of fistula by cauterization
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have mentioned in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not work, then it is necessary to cauterize it in this way.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Command the patient to put his head in your hands; and tie the assistant's head between your hands in this way that it does not move, nor moves its head; after put cotton moilliet behind the ear or in the juice of wormwood on the oil; after heat the cauterizer which is there: and it is fastened to the head as if the form of a pen of feather, similarly the one that is the cauterizer; if you see, so it is appointed from the one chief to the other, and if you see, also it is like a tent; but all the same, this which is fastened is useful for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula, it opens, and in its trace, there is the pus and the dryness; and if it is closed, if it opens, and if it works outside of the bowels; after that, put the cautery very hot, and hold your hand at the part of the neck above the oil, so that your hands do not do foolish things; and put the cautery into the grease of the oil, and corrupt.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery just to the bone, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, if you restart the cautery once more, and if you have experience, and leave it for three days; after that, put soft cotton in butter, and use the desiccating ointment until it is healed, and if forty days pass without being healed, then put corrosive medicine on it until the bone is exposed; and the king according to what he would have in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a method of cauterizing fistulas that none of the ancients said.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Apply to the fistula, and clean the area; then put in the fine powder of which this is made:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	And they make in the quantity of a small drop; and hold your hand firmly, and do not move the hairs until the powder melts into its oil; and it is necessary to put on top of the oil on the hair cotton moistened with enough or too much: the powder heals the skin of the fistula, and the wound by a wonderful cure.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the sinus is healed by the cauterization we have mentioned, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, then one must administer purgatives to the nose, and bring the sinus back to its proper place in the nose as it should be.
des crevaices en levres	mouth sores
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times there are mouth sores in the lips that are called "poil", and also in the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these sores as we have mentioned in the previous section, and the treatment does not help, then one should apply a small cauterizing needle in this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place him in those cracks until he reaches the font; after healing, remove the clay from the limb as soon as it is healthy.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or in the bladder, or palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it has fermented and rotted and become old and becomes a fistula; and you cure it as we have said in divisions, and it does not help much: therefore it is necessary that you have the fire cauterization according to the quantity of the fistula; after breaking or perforating the fistula, and keeping your hand there until the hot iron reaches the font of the limb, and behind the limb; and do so once or twice, then cure as we have said in cures, until it is healthy; and if it is cured thus, it is good; and if not, if necessary to reveal the limb and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat them with medicines but it does not work, then put a piece of cloth over the bad tooth; after heating the cautery that will come out soon in a certain way that you place a cinnamon on the tooth; and apply the cautery deeply and hold your hand tightly so that the pains feel the heat coming to the root of the tooth; then remove your hand and start the cautery according to your will; after filling the mouth with saltwater, and leave it for an hour and then spit out.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in a similar manner, the tooth that was moving is confirmed, and the gum softened and held back, and the moisture corrupted dried up.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When pain from the teeth comes from coldness, or there is coldness or wind, and medical treatments are not effective, then it is necessary to use cauterization in two ways: cauterization with butter and cauterization with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cauterization with butter is such that you take butter from a fresh piece, and the end on an iron or brass spoon; afterwards, take cotton and wrap it around the point of a tent, and moisten in hot butter, and put on the painful tooth firmly and hold until it is cooled; and thus do often until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see that moistened wool and cotton in hot butter, and put on the aching tooth, and put on the heated iron until the heat reaches the movement of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	The cauteries are made with fire that is such that you grip a hot iron or brass, and it is thick enough that the smoke does not reach the mouth of the wound; afterwards heat the cautery, because from there will come the form that will be here after, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery has cooled; do this often, for the pain will be removed the same day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is necessary that the wound fills its mouth with good butter in the urgency of this cautery, and then let it cool; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make the cauterization of the wound that you wish, and according to what you have; and it is in the form of a cane:
des scrophules	of sponges
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the sponges are cold and humid, and are not obedient to digestion by medicines, then heat the cauterized wound with the following form, and have two openings for the fumes to issue from the other side; and place the cauterized tool high on the abscess once, or as often as necessary until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, place the cauterized tool according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it for three days; and place moist cotton with honey on the burn until the wound is healed; afterwards, treat the wound with ointments and bandages until it is healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	The shape of the skull:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When moisture overwhelms the channels of the body, and especially when this comes from a cold constitution, then it is necessary to first empty the hairs by medicines that dissolve; afterwards, apply cauterization at the root of the throat, and do not bring the heat too close to the throat, but with a little care.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	Afterwards, apply another cauterization at the joint of the neck to the base of the spine, and let the cauteries that are called "clavicles" because of which we have the shape in front; and cure the limb as we have said before until it is healed.
de la toust	of the mouth
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When tooth and disease of the gums are due to cold moisture, and the pain has no fever or heat, and is an old disease, then apply two cauteries on the forceps in their eyes; and the other cautery goes between the two breasts; and let the cauteries be called "clavile" according to the form that is before said.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see, apply the cauteries by holding the entire cautery that is called "poins" because of the form that is above in the disease of the ears; and let the poins be just under 30, or around.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After treatment, the patient according to what has been said before, and let the fire cauterize at three points in this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And because the fire cauterizes are lighter, because you make them three times as much.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After, shave the hairs on their back and on their ribs; after, relieve the sore spot inside the tenderness of two fingers of your right hand; and if the joint is misaligned inside, then heat the fire cauterize with two burns in this form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and cauterize the wound as long as it does not pierce through to the other side, and bring together four burns; and because of this, cauterization is made with the three-pronged cautery, for the reason that the shape of cauterization is these three prongs; and the nerves are according to the subtlety of a tent and this is the form of the three-pronged cautery.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And never place it above this one nerve because it has eight burns.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After place the cautery on top of the wound; after resting the pain, and do not move the member for a long time until it is well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above, this matter happens little, then make a cautery above the thick part of the cautery clavicle, or many cauteries in pricking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and it is healed by moisture and is free from pain.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When cold and much moisture come to the stomach until it reaches its condition, and they multiply his diarrhea, and are customary ways of cures that he does not profit from, then it is necessary that the pain be soothed above his back, and he extends his legs and hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	After this, make three cautery marks with the smallest knife possible due to their quantity, all along the claw, and two more cautery marks after the second rib until the figure of the cautery is at three angles, and have equal space between them so they are not joined together when they bend; and let the cautery be so that it does not press on both sides of the chest, and let the figure of the cautery be in this form without twisting:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you see that the cautery is too large in the stomach according to this form; and if someone is afraid of this cautery, cauterize by pinching and holding above the stomach at point i. according to the quantity that you see of it; then cauterize all along the cautery which is called «poins».
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the aforementioned cure, as long as they are healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver causes pain from heat and moisture and large vents, as long as it is not removed from its natural condition by excess; and the pains are treated as we have said in divisions, and it does not help them much, it is necessary that the pains be above its diaphragm; and a sign of three cauteries according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, below the hypochondres, where the neck of the ox comes; and there should be space between each cautery the breadth of one; and let the cauteries be long as the body, and press not much with the hand at all over the cautery; and let the pain be only on the side, and let the pains be above its feet; and if it cannot, let it lie down, and extend its legs, and lift its arms; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	If you wish to cauterize these cauteries with a surgical knife, if you are skilled and wise in the art, and you guard that you do not burn all the tissue, for you would harden all the body; and that it does not come close to boiling, for the wounds are very delicate there, and the wise ones should see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When he has an abscess in the liver, and you see whether it is in the flesh of the liver or in the mesh: if it is in the flesh, it does not cause much pain; and if it is in the mesh, it causes intense pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And when this cure has taken effect, if the hairs should grow unevenly on his head; then prick the place where the abscess was, or where there is an aposteme, and then heat the cauterizing iron which is similar to a thorn, of which here is the form:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize with the iron until the pus is all gone; afterwards, according to the treatment of wounds, as long as they are healed; and it should be used by no one except those who have studied medicine for a long time, and by whose hands these diseases have never been corrupted.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Therefore, it can be boldly attempted, and in all ways it seems to me that it is worth trying.
dou cautere de pleuresin	the fire cauterization
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The old said that one should perform fire cauterization with the roots of aristolochia, and in this way: take a long root of aristolochia, the longest you can find, and dry it, and as thick and long as your finger; and moisten it in oil, and place it in the fire, and cauterize the cautery between the eyebrow and the forehead, and two small cauteries a little down in the part that is outside the beard; and two cauteries between the fifth rib and the spine, declining a little behind; and one cautery at the bottom, and the other above the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two on the sides of the waist, and one between the shoulder blades; and do not press your hand, but open it as you would when smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And the ancients said that no man uses a cautery like a razor, and they scrape it and put it between the ribs, until it comes to the abscess; and suddenly the pain was gone, as we have said about the liver abscess.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work, there is fear or the pain kills now, or a fistula comes that cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have said about dividing treatments, and it does not improve, then they use three methods of cauterization that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	In this method, you make three or four cauteries, aligning them along the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the liver cauteries we have mentioned before; and do not press your hand on the entire cauterization, and let the hairs be close by its back; and another method of cauterization is that you heat the cauterization that has two needles, as we have shown in the shoulder dislocation; and lift the curvature that is near the mouse's ear, or where the pain from the ear comes from the left side, and let the elevations that you lift the curvature according to its curve, according to the length of the body, and the cauterization should be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After you have bound the two nerves, burn them until the keeper is perceived from the other side, and then remove the cautery, and thus you will have four. And if you see, then cauterize the entire cautery at three nerves.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment when it has gotten pus from long tension, and this is worth mentioning as another cure before mentioned.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cauterizing is not good for hydropsy, except in the manner which is called "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you treat it according to the methods that we have said in divisions, and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary that you make four cautery around the belly, and one above the stomach, and one above the liver, and one above the kidneys, and one behind the back above the spine, and one at the worst place; and let the cauteries be close to the edge of the keeper.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After leaving the cauterizer open for a long time to stop bleeding, and not neglecting the care of the wound after the cauterization; and healing would be hastened, and together with the help of God, the two intentions would be achieved.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the cauterizer for the stomach is like the one we have shown before; and for the back, it is olive-shaped, as it is written above.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the inflammation of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the feet are inflamed in one who is hydroptic, and are plain of yellow bile, you must cauterize above the foot between the auricular and annular; and relieve your hand with the cauterizer towards returning.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deeply into the flesh, thus avoiding the yellowish part, and let the cautery be done in this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After applying two cautery irons on each leg at the tip of the spatula; and let the cautery be long, one behind the knee in front and the other in front of the knee on the leg; and leave the cautery over a longer period to cure the wound that has been made.
de la menoison	of the misalignment
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	When the solution of the stomach comes from cold and moisture, as long as the retentive and digestive virtues that are in the stomach and in the intestines are obstructed, and cannot be cured by other means of treatment; and you see the pain is very severe and of great benefit, then apply a large cautery over the stomach according to what has been said before about the cautery of the stomach, with the cautery circulating; and four cautery irons around the belly, all the thin cautery clamps, and two cautery irons on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering from pain, apply fire cauterization on the nipple, and I cauterization on each island, and II small cauterizations on the stomach below the large one, for the cure is beneficial when it has good assistance.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the treatment of worms
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When the worms are deeply rooted, or one or more, and are ancient and are large humors cold and moist corroded, and are treated as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit, then apply fire cauterization: III on the spine of the back, which is entirely before unmelted little by little in triangular, and I cauterization outside the belly II doses; and if you think that his stomach is cooled, and the food does not cook, and one sees the face swells, then the face apply I large cauterization on the stomach, as it is previously said, and I other on the liver, and I other on the mouse at all the cauterization clavile; and leave the cauterization open long tense.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment, the patient as long as they are healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the skin disease called "thelul
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you apply the cautery, if it seems like a razor, and then put it all on fire above the "thelul" spot; and let your hand be as long as the cauterizer comes near the base of the vein, from which the blood flows; do this once or twice, and if there is much "thelul", cauterize each one as we have said; after curing the wounds as long as they are healthy; and if you cauterize with a large cautery above the "thelul", it will have greater help.
de plaie mal curee	of poorly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the wounds cannot be suffered by a surgeon or opened, as we will tell you about in its place, then comes illness that cannot be healed except by cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When any comes fistula, and is awake and given porridge and corrupted moisture, then you must provide the whole tent with a thin skin, and guard that you clean the tent as much as it has of purity.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After heating the cauterizer which seems like a razor, and putting it into the fistula according to the quantity that the tent has entered, and start the cauterization as long as those cors are burned and corrupted, once, or two, or three, according to the quantity of the wound; and guard against burning the nerves which are inside, and the great veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	If the fistula goes to the center of the bladder and the intestine, you should avoid these areas, and only do so in the area that is not too thin, and think that it is not healed; after healing the area as long as it is healthy, and if the area is still sore, and the matter is removed along with the tension, then wash the area that is completely healed; and if the matter is not removed, and the area is still sore, and the bone is corrupted at the source, and thus like one of those that we will say in its area.
de la maladie des reins	of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain of the flank comes to the kidneys, and with great swelling, and does not take the form of a woman, then it is necessary that you do fire cautery on the kidneys from both sides at the clavile cautery that we have previously mentioned; and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauterizations in a line, and they will be greater help.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is small and weak from dryness and moisture, if the hairs retain urine, then cauterize in the part before the bladder, where the hairs begin to grow, on the right and on the left, and let each cautery be as long as a needle; and do one cauterization in front of the back, or two if you have need; and let the clavile cauteries be done according to the form previously mentioned.
de la marris	of the marsh
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the marsh is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their terms late; and when they come, they cause great pain: therefore it is necessary to do three cautery around the womb, as we have said about cauterization of the bladder, and two cauterizations in front of the back; and let the clavile cauteries be done as we have said.
de la hainche	of the waist
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When viscous moisture descends to the waist bone, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the legs are found to be bent, then you must cauterize the pain above the waist bone with a cautery similar to a circle, and sign before the bone around the waist so that it returns, so that the waist is inside the circle; and if it is such a cautery as has been cauterized in the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cauterization is not present, then make three cauterizations of large olive-sized ones, and let the cauterizations be as before for all the curatives; and the cure until they are healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain of the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the hip joint, and it is from cold and moisture, and the hairs are cured of what we have said in the division and the cure does not work, and the disease is ancient: therefore it is necessary that you purge the hairs of the large humors with bad-smelling pills, or other good-smelling pills similar.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After the fire cauterization; and the manner of this cauterization is according to two methods: that is to say, together with burning medicines, and fire cauterization.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cauterization is according to many methods, of which some are: that you cauterize above the hip joint three triangular cauterizations in this form, and do good depth and great, and let there be between each cauterization a space of an inch, and let the cauterizations be olive-shaped; never made on the middle above the hip, because it is there four according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see that the cauterizer uses the circular instrument that we have previously mentioned in the dislocation of the shoulder; but do it in a different way so that the circle contains the entire shoulder and all the tendons should be included.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the way it is done in sciatica, when the pain remains in the shoulder and does not reach the thigh or leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it comes to the thigh and leg, then make two cautery marks where the pain is located, and one cautery mark above the ankle four fingers wide, on the right side a little; and let the cauterizing instrument be sharp, and let the thickness of the tendon be included; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two or three fingers or near the foot, then cauterize where he feels the pain three times or four with the cautery mark called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if it is a job, do more; and if the pain is from the groin to the thigh, apply cauterization with a cutaneous or circular cautery, and be careful in all your cauterizations that you do not burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause greater harm and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	I myself have seen many who applied cauterization above the ankle of the foot, and burned so much that the leg was completely deformed, and the feet also, and all the bones were perforated and rotten.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a vomiting spell from which they died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in both parts together, perform cauterization in one and the other, according to this method.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the wise say in the cauterization of the back, because of this method, use such a sharp and as large as a navillon of a finger, or a little less, and it should be inserted between the ribs and inserted from one to the other at a distance equal to the thickness of a thumb; and the inserts should be above two parts, and they should also be like needles, and there is a good handle of iron. And this is the shape:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it should be heated until it is all red and the senses are gone, and then place it on the back of the painful back, and turn it over to the healthy side; and the cauterization once with the cauterizer and leave it for three days; and then apply a poultice of butter, and leave the wound open for ten days; after the ointment cure until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasis says that we use this cautery little due to its frightful appearance, and few see those who use it; nevertheless, it is a good cauterizer, which can bear the heat, and where it adheres.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The cauterizing instruments of medicine are such that you make them into a punch with an edge on the margin of the door, and either of brass or iron at one end, and in the height have II, and between each has the quantity of the size of a pin; and they are open below and above, and join together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After placing the board of the back on the painful side lying down, and quickly applying your hand over the board of the back; afterwards pour between the two circles of the hot water which has been heated at the fire one pint, and let it stand for an hour, and suffer the pain with the heat and the burning of it.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is true that the burning is as painful as fire; and when the burning has passed, lift your hand with the instrument and raise the back gently, and let it rest for three hours, and put butter on it until the black scorching is removed; and let it rest for three hours so that the purity is restored; and this would be the last aid after the cure of wounds as long as it is healthy.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has spread to the thigh or leg, use the instrument that you have made for the abdomen, according to what you have done in the abdomen, and this is the method of the hot bath, and I have written it where I treat the correction of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take equal amounts of quicklime and fresh charcoal, grind them together, and put them in a new earthenware pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	Or if there is a small hole where the point of a razor cannot enter; and put that pot in another well-closed pot, and put over it alkali and charcoal and hot water until there are two above the powders, so that you will have it well prepared in your hand; and let it remain until all the water has dripped off or the pot is broken, then take all the water and pour it over the charcoal and alkali as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And if it is very painful and administered in the form of medical operations and cauterization of other members, because it does its work like fire, and if it is used with other medicines that are well cauterized on the back, such as anacardium and chalk mixed with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	Galen tells us of a cure that some were cured of the pain in the back and sciatic vein, and they were very happy, and he says that no other cure was given, and that they were cured once when this cure was given, and he was bathed as he teaches here afterwards.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And in a similar manner, you should apply a fresh, green willow bark, and grind it thoroughly with a little grease, and put on the back and thighs and legs where the pain is, and bind it; and let it stay for three hours, and by the amount that the pains do not feel the burning.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then let him enter a warm bath as much as the body is slightly warmed, and make him lie down, and the pain will go away and be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And let it be known that no one should use such cauterizing medicines unless after the evacuation of blood.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Hippocrates said that when the vein is cut, it should be cauterized with iron from sheep, and this helps much; and the cautery should be made in such a manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take another and the old oil, and pour it into the fossa between the thumb and the other one called foscile.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	Then take some dry sheep fat, and put it in the fire until it becomes charcoal, and pour it onto the cloth, and leave it until it is soaked; and do this again, and do not stop doing this until you think by sense that it comes close to the back, and that the pain has ceased; and this method of cauterization is called "cautere de chievre".
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain of two bones
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or from impact or from too much bloodletting, or from similar expansive cold matter, none of these is as effective as cauterization, because it comes from the heat of hot matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary that after the pain has been emptied of fetid pills or similar things, which are placed on top of the back where the pain is, three lines thick with cauteries, and in each line V cauteries or more according to the power and quantity that the pain can bear; and let the cauteries be done according to the cauterizing iron called "poins"; and if you see, make III cauteries or IV at the average cauterizing iron of this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This disease often comes to small children, and the signs of onset are that they have narrow aliment when walking, and fear; and you feel in the last spinous process of the back and in us the appearance that comes above the other spinous processes.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this disease and you want to cure it, if you cauterize with the fire cautery in this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	If the fire cautery grips each part of the spinous process.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, if you cauterize around the spinous process with the fire cautery gripping II lines or III, and the points are near each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After treatment, the patient should be kept as healthy as possible according to what we have said, and you must not apply cauterization with a sharp instrument that is near a nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When the pain of the joints is due to moisture that has spread to each limb of the body, and when the pain comes suddenly, which is properly called "gout", and when it is caused by cold and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauterization in this way: apply a great deal of cauterization around the joint, and the cauterizing oil should be applied in this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is a sign that you should hold the face of the child during the cauterization, then perform the entire cauterization with the claim "not here".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come from the jaw and other joints, and it happens often, then perform cauterization on each jaw with three or four cautery rods from each part, at the entire olive oil cauterization; and if you have more skill, do so, but do not hold your hand further than the tip of the curved rod of the healer.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the jaw and back, then administer the cauterization that we have mentioned in its chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are severe, apply points two lines apart; and if they remain unchanged, apply points above each joint and above the hair of the hand; and if the pains come from the wrists or shoulders, cauterize each part, and give good government to the patient and proper medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you give good government and purge the humor, he will be healed by the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	of the gaping wound
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When the gaping wound comes in anger, and the bowels descend into the abdomen and this is new, it is necessary that when you see to cure him, that he not move much that day; and that you use things that reduce the belly, so that the contents of his belly do not fall out; afterwards make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his breath until the bowels are returned, and pull them back with your fingers, and press down on the wound above the bone of the thumb, and at all signs that resemble a half-circle above the body; then heat the cautery with this form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	as long as it is white and drips senselessly.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then remove the mud from its place; and the attendants stain their hands above so they do not return backward; and work well on the thighs with the hairs, and put some oil on him on the knees and on the joints, and the other on the worst that stains his hands; then put the cauterizer on all of your hand, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, start again with another one until you come close to the bone; and be careful that the mud does not escape when you do the cauterizer; that you do not burn it; and that by this way the pain does not kill, or other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And when you do not reach the bone with the fire cautery, your work is worthless.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And the cauterization of children should be subtle according to their age, and adults according to their size; after three days, care for the wound with butter until the burn is healed; then care for other injuries as long as they are healed, and let the hairs grow long on their back until the wound is well sealed; and it should be washed thoroughly, so that the pus does not spread when they move around.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	After forty days, when he wishes to rise, give him a well-made bandage, and let it remain for forty more days; and let him have good rest, that he may work little and avoid too much repletion from drinking and eating, and too high elevation; and if he follows this instruction, he is entirely sound.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will tell you afterwards about the treatment of cutting into his chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the renting of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When rents come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow anymore, then apply the fire cautery according to its quantity, and let one-third of the care be applied; after the cure according to what we have said; and none of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized with the cautery at three angles in this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but first signify the shoulder joint and make a line for the width above the fracture, and another behind, and with your hand hold all the cauterizing iron.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	but the first cauteries are lighter and more gentle.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	when pain comes in any limb, whether it is to fall or to strike, and this pain lasts long, and the cure of medicine does not help, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called «poins», and the cauteries should follow the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and its strength and its location of twists and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If the first cautery is healthy, it's good; if not, start another cautery above the first one, as it is customary that the wound should be made to the member that is nearest, because you must make the cauteries until the injuries are healed.
de meselerie	of medicine
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	Medicine is never helped by cauterization with great help, and even the disease that comes from putrefaction of the humor and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	If you see cauterization, take care if the disease is at the beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not spread or remain, and you doubt that corruption may spread throughout the injury, then make these cauterizations: I on the forehead and the other towards the front at the end of the eyebrows; II above the two eyes, and I behind the temple; and leave as much hand as the cauterization comes just to the bone, and as long as the eschars come out so that the vapors of the large humors can escape; and cauterize on the mouse according to what is before.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules; et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	And if the infection is widely spread; and it is clearly apparent, then it is necessary that you cauterize with these cauteries that we have said or chief, and the cautery at the base of the nose, and two cauteries above the spine of the neck, and six cauteries above the spine of the back, and one great one and one other below, and two above the shoulders, and two above the elbows, and two above the knees, and two above each joint of the hands and feet, and above the hand wounds; and beware of those that are above the buttocks calcifying, that you do not burn them; and never once make a cautery above the bone of the wrist, and one above the bone of the stomach, and one above the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And remember that the more you perform the cauterization, the less you should provide assistance, and it benefits him; and remember that the wounds do not feel pain as much as the healthy ones, because the body is already corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	It is necessary that the cauterization be large and small according to the members and the joints, as you will find in the manner of irons.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After treating the wound with flour and honey and other treatments until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the swelling comes to any member and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and it is not healed, then perform cauterization on the member according to its size and smallness; and let the cauterization go a little into the skin; then treat the wounds until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And it is never done with fire cauterization by hand and at the wrist and at the back, at the end of the nerve that makes the limb move, and thus if it is swollen, it is stretched; and in no way does it interfere with anyone if they are not knowledgeable about the limbs and their movements.
de albaras	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	For the disease called "albaras" that is awakened, and medical means do not help, then cauterize with a cautery a little in advance, according to the quantity of the spice of choice, until the wound is healed, and its color is restored; then cure with flour of wheat and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and coltsfoot and alder, each part; and mix everything together, and bind it on the affected area, and apply to the limb as long as it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	the treatment of chancres by cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When a chancre first appears and you want to stop its spread, cauterize it with the cauterizing iron that seems like a circle, all around the edge of the chancre.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And all the sages say that one should also make the cauterization in the middle of the chancre; and I do not think this is good, because I believe it should not be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never seen it happen once; and a more important thing is that it be cauterized all around, with the cauterizing iron that is called «circle», as we have said in many cauterizations.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the puffed up who cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When anyone has a disease called "adubelati", and it lingers on the brink of death due to the excess it causes or because of the age of the patient when they are elderly (that is, too old) and have little blood, or due to the tension; and you see it hastening towards death: then cauterize around with many small cauteries while pricking; afterwards leave it thus.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it piercing through the entire cauterization, then heat the cauterization from where this is the form:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the middle of this disease called "adubelati" until the cauteries have pierced the surface, and be such that the cauteries feel the pain in a similar manner to the course of the pus being alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment until they are perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	The treatment of fire by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another way of disease is called "corrodens", and it is nothing but a small amount of a member, for it misaligns the members as if the dry reeds were doing so.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in the leg that can suffer cauterization together with fire, then heat the cauteries sharp and large, according to what is needed for the leg or the disease; afterwards cauterize all parts until you reach all the corruption, and nothing remains of it, so that everything that is corrupted is removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	Let it rest for three days, and then apply the cauterized leather over the wounds, suffering with oil until the scorched parts of fire are removed, and all corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment of wounds, worms generate char.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if you see after three days that healthy worms do not arise, it is good; but if not, then restart the cauterization over the remaining leather.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this method has never been cured by medicine in place of fire cauterization; but the fire cauterization is of greater help, and I have already given the cure of the medicine in the division: take it when you have the opportunity.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of the thorns that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	often come to the feet by defilement, and a disease arises which is called "closed" according to our understanding, and is a great harm that becomes the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauteries for this disease are in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	It is to say, fire cauterization, and water-hot cauterization.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Fire cauterization is that you heat the cauterizer like a quill, and it should be made of good iron at the measure that it can penetrate the nail on all parts, and that it has thin margins; afterwards, put it all hot on top of the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until it comes to the end of the nail; and leave it thus for three days until it begins to rot; then make an ointment of wild herbs ground with silk, and leave the ointment all night, and the nail will fall off and be uprooted from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then, treat the injured limb with a warm poultice until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are converted by deflowering the wound, and often in hands and feet, then it is necessary to apply cauterization with very hot iron; and it is done in this way: take a needle of brass or iron, or a quill pen, and place it on the nail and the cuticle, that is, pricking the warts; and place the needle so that it surrounds everything, then put a drop of very hot water, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand in turning so that the edge of the needle comes to the root of the nail, and find the very hot water deep into the root; and suffer the pain of the hot water for an hour; then leave it like this, and it will all fall out at its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Then do another, until you have examined all those in the heart, then treat the wounds that engender pus which causes char.
li cure dou trembler	the treatment of the trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee; et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When anyone trembles from cold or shivering, or from a quarter fever or other, it is necessary that you make four cauteries or four on the spine of the back; one cautery between each spine; and one below the belly, and one above the stomach at the olive cautery; this will let them tremble, and hasten the recovery from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of pus-filled abscesses
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	No times appear due to previous causes, such as swollen, pus-filled sores, which come from large, corrupted matter.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	If it is appropriate when they appear, then one should perform a cauterization above each head of the pustule: a subtle cauterization with the tip of a burning twig, or from the root of aristolochia long, or with the lenticular cauterization.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And no times should they be cauterized at the beginning when they appear, according to this method, and they cannot grow further, but are broken down by the excess from which they come, and are healed; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there is great bleeding from the cut artery at the wound that comes from the sides, or at the incision of the abscess, or in the cauterization of the member, and similar things; and it is a very painful thing to stop.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And in any case, if it happens to anyone, you must quickly place your first finger on the wound of the vein, and press very hard until the bleeding is stopped from your first finger, and no more blood comes out; then put on the fire cauteries of olive oil many times, both small and large, until they are all red; then take I, or great or small according to the wound and the limb in which the artery is pierced, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your first finger, and keep the cautery there until the bleeding is stopped.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if the first one fails when you lift your second finger above the vein, and the cauterizer is extinguished, then quickly take the other cauterizers that are in the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not stop doing this one after the other until the blood is stopped; and be careful that you do not burn the nerve that is next to it, and that no other harm comes over the wound; and make sure that when the artery is not cut, it cannot be stopped immediately when the artery is large, unless by one of the four ways we have said: or by cauterization, or by extraction when it is not yet treated, or by a very tight bandage, or by medicines placed on top that have power to stop bleeding; and let it be tied and strained.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever administers tight binding with cloth or metal objects on top, or similar things, does not profit unless they do not.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone and they have no remedy present, they should place their finger index over the wound of the vein as we have said, and tightly bind it until it is cauterized above the wound and above the vein; and they should not move it, but keep it cold often with cold water until the flesh is frozen and swollen and cauterized; and make inquiries about what they need for cautery and remedies.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of remedies for tails
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first book all diseases for which it is necessary to cauterize with fire, or with a burning medicine, and the symptoms and causes and instruments and forms of cauteries; and I will put this chapter about the lower jaw from the neck downwards, and I will go into this chapter by that same way so that one may find more easily what one wants.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And therefore when I begin this chapter, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of cauteries, and therefore it requires greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	In the work of this chapter, there has often been bloodletting when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you not to undertake folly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many ways of people come for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	If they come from such people who have become so with their disease that they die immediately because of the remedy they find for their disease, and because of the greatness of its evil; and these one must fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And of these, there are those who give you their meaning, and say: "Wait, I am sharp"; and the disease is spiteful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	You should not grant consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but place greater caution in your honor than in your desire, and do not rashly but wisely from that of which you are certain, and which you have taken and lost; and use prediction and indication in the treatment of your illnesses for the sake of converting health; and this will help you to gain good reputation, and glory, and memory for the long term.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, Our Lords grant you good understanding and uprightness, and if you wish to breathe from the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	I have ordered you to examine this chapter by comparing it with other chapters on cauteries, as I have done from the beginning to the end, so that you may find it more easily what concerns you.
dou chief plein d’aigue	full of sharp
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	This disease often occurs in children at birth, and when the child's head is held too tightly; and sometimes it comes from a cause that is not known.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	I have never seen this disease except in children, and all those that I have seen died; and because it seems to me that it is better to avoid such work in treating them.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw a child who was complaining of a sharp pain, and the head was swelling each day until it could no longer be supported; and he thought so much of the moisture that he died, and this moisture is assembled outside the bone above the symphysis, between the jaw and the bone; and if the swelling is between the jaw and the bone, and the abscesses are small, you should make a wide incision in the head; and let it be as long as II, so that the moisture flows out; and get the shape of the splint:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more extensive, and the abscess is larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the joint is dislocated from the bone, and you see the signs that you see the commissures of the shoulder open on each part, and the sharp pain when you press it with your hand inside, and it does not return to you: then you must make three cuts in the shoulder in this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, remove all the moisture.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After closing the wounds with bandages and powders, and put wine and oil, and leave it so for five days; then reset it, and treat the wound with bandages and counter-irritants, and keep the shoulder immobilized, and gradually apply moisture to the dry meat until the member is comfortable and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	Another method of incision is to look for the largest part of the abscess and the sharpest point of the lancet; as it is never in front, never behind, never on the right, and never on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Cut the part of the abscess that is open, and fill it with the point of the lancet, and make the incision according to what you can do; and be careful not to cover the artery; and if there is blood flow, the hairs may die from the outflow of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	I'm sorry, I don't understand
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When it has a certain disease called "cataract" in the eyes or in the pupil, and the disease is ancient, and the medical cure does not help much, then the curative treatment is to cauterize with fire that covers the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Therefore, when you see that the hairs cover, it is necessary to make the painful part of the head; then rub the neck with a rough cloth until the arteries open, then hold the painful part against all the cloth; then look where the blood comes from, and the ears on both sides are after the ears, and they are not replaced; then sign the ears of the cure, then cover each side with a strip of two parts of agile cloth, until the cut reaches the bone, and it should be through the width of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see, push the spatula away from the artery and cover it above, cutting as if you should through.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, if blood spurts out continuously from above.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open when felt, then measure the amount of space between three fingers, then enlarge and cut into the bone; and as much blood as needed should be put out, perhaps a little more or less depending on what the patient can bear, and the replenishment of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains above the bone point, if the cloth that was applied does not come into contact, then close and bind the wound, and treat with ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	of emigrain
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When old emigrain comes, and the catarrh is severe, due to the moisture of tears and the chills in the temples and ancient sweat and similar things, and it is treated by methods of healing medicine and nothing seems to help, then we must strain the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have related.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of their extraction is that the hairs of his temples are made to face the other way, and listen to the artery that opens in the temple, because it opens well by its beating, and it is not replaced sooner than in any men who are too cold; and if it is replaced, then strain the skin with some cloths, then rub the leather of some rough cloth, and heat the leather with boiling hot water until the artery clearly opens; then take the spatula of which this is the shape:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	then shave the light skin gently until you reach the artery, then cut it at the top with pincers, and remove all the threads that are stuck to each part; and if the artery is thin, turn it back to the point of the needle, then cover that part according to the amount of the two chapters.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	for if it is not covered, it will not heal completely.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	and draw out some blood from the sixth canthus to the third; and if the artery is large, it is necessary that you tie it in two turns of a strong silk thread, which does not allow any blood to come before the suppuration of the wound, and comes out of the blood; then cover the excess between the two threads in the same hour, and then, if you see, if you cauterize the wound with the cutting cautery up to the bone until the chapters are covered; and this is the best work, if the wounds do not have fever and he is of hot constitution.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	Because the fire cautery is to finish the swellings: for it is of greater help to swellings.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	For the extraction of arteries, it is necessary to fill the wound with old cotton and place bandages well made; and when they are removed, care should be taken with dry medicines that produce heat and bandages until they are healed; and if without bleeding from the artery as you have worked, you must quickly cover it with a cauterizer, or you fill the wound with vinegar and hold it in your hand so that the bleeding does not stop, and freeze the wound with cold water until it stops bleeding, and hold it tightly; and what is more difficult and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this cauterizer cutting from II parts, but the cuts should be well spaced to last longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	When instruments are too tightly tied, they hold less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus; et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And there should be between the two knives a large space, and then when you have sealed the two wounds, and you place the hot iron above so that it comes to the bone, and copper the vein in two places; and they should be separated between the two wounds because it is not known how much of this cauterization will be needed; and this is the form of the cauterization:
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes are flowing down the veins that are above the skin of the forehead, and it does not improve with any medical treatment, and you see the face of the illness becoming twisted, and they feel as if they are trembling; and their hair is held and moist so much that the hairs of the pillows are stained, and the pillows are soiled, and burned by the heat of the tears, if there is a need for this treatment.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And they would call the ancient "wound healer," and you should make three cuts evenly along the length of the front; one of the cuts as close to the bottom of the front, and the others two at the costal bones above the ribs, and guard against incising the arteries that are above the costal bones; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the two mandibles, and let each wound have a quantity of three drops through the joins; and have prepared a piece of sponge and much cloth to soak up the blood, then plug the opening with the following form:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the incision that is to be made at the temple just above the second incision; and scrape off all the matter that is between the two cuts as far as the syfac that is above the bone, then make another cut from the other side of the same incision up to the second cut, and then extract this spicule.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If you put in the first cut the tool called "curette", which is very sharp on one side, and on the other side is soft, not very sharp, and it has this shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And put the sharp side of the curette towards the charred matter, and the soft side towards the bone, and scrape until it reaches the same cut.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cover all the vessels that descend from the head as far as the eyes until the incision is continued up to where it opens, and then make another one in the same place towards the other side; and then extract the arrow evenly, and express the wound for the arrow taken; then put a piece of old cloth in each incision, and put moistened cloths on top made of wine and oil and vinegar, and make sure that abscesses do not come; and the next day remove the bandage, and apply a large amount of fresh sorrel, then the cure of basilicon with rose oil, and other cures that are used to heal wounds, until they are healed.
dou reume des eulz	remedy for the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When any come to have cataract due to custom, and you see the eyes tight and small, and weakened vision, and burnt papers; and the hairs are shaved, and where the hair is shaved there is great pain, and the limbs are stiff; therefore, by these accidents that those matters and that cataract do not come only from many wounds, and the cure that is, if it is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And it is that you command the patient to turn his head back, then make a deep cut in the front, and another one wide on the side of the neck.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And it begins from the cut on the right temple to the left temple, and the incision should be just above the bone; and remove your hand from the nerves of the temples that move at will; and when the bone is exposed, soak all the blood in a sponge, then wipe between the two lips of the cut and put old cotton, and tents of linen; then bind above with moistened cloths in wine and oil, and guard against suppuration; when it is removed, it is necessary to rub the bone until charcoal begins to form, then care for things that cause charring, like char.
En teil maniere: pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of columbo, and make a poultice; and apply the poultice to these wounds to draw out the char.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the earache
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that which enters the ears is one of the four things: either grains, or beasts, or stones like iron; or seeds, such as lentils, beans, peas; or falling things such as water and other similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it enters the ear as a stone or other hard thing that does not fit well in the ear, it does not grow in the ear, so put the ear to the sunlight.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the arrow, if there is any drop of purple oil or hemlock oil, then apply it to the extraction; and the way to do this is to make the patient spit out the contents of their mouth, and cover their nose when they sneeze, and place pieces of cloth or wool around their ear; and hold the ear upwards.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Many times the mouth is relieved by this treatment; and if it does not relieve, then apply extraction with fine needles, of which this is the form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it jumps with the needles, it is good; if not, apply extraction with a fine needle of small double-pointed type; and if it does not jump, then make a rain gutter and blow the head of the gutter or the pus from the ear very hard so that nothing can enter with the gutter; then pull it out carefully, because many times it is relieved as we have said; and if it does not relieve in this way, then take some cloth of which they are made, and put something sharp at one end to make a point for this purpose, and put a little cotton around; then press the cloth over the arrow or whatever else, and pull it out.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If she does not jump from all these things that we have said, then quickly cut the ear in the same way as an abscess bursts and comes out, and spasms; and the manner of the cut is that you first make a small incision into the painful part of the ear, and extract the pus according to its strength, then place the pus between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear where it depends on the fat; and let the cut be like a moon, as far as you come to the bone, then remove it according to your power, and suck it vigorously into your mouth; and the cure until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is a small grain that is embedded and it swells, administer extraction; and if it cannot be removed, administer the following subtle remedy according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and make an incision of that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not make such incisions when you think the grains are moist due to earwax, until you have made many pieces; then extract them with subtle tweezers and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction is aligned.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the acute case when it is in the ear, it is appropriate that the hairs use the first condition of sneezing, and widen the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let it lie across the very ear itself or the sharp one.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it jumps out because of the sky, that's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If not, take many stones according to the length of your hand and light ones, and heat them in the fire; and put the hairs one or punctured of his ear, and go up from his other foot, and strike another stone against the stone that is in the ear; and do not cease to do this stone by stone until the sharp is all out, and thus it jumps all out; and if you see, take the stick, and bore one of the hairs in the ear, and the other head takes fire as long as the least stick is burned; then make other sticks until the sharp is all out, as we have said in the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the animal, if it is of small size, as with a mouse and similar things, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is of large size, where one can feel it, then lessen the extraction of pincers; and it is the lightest thing to remove that is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	When extracting worms from the ears, if you treat them as we have said in the division and where treating distillations, and the cure does not help, then it is necessary to look at the ear in the sunlight: if there are no worms, then remove them with delicate pincers, and if they do not come out, then take a needle of this form.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And apply the most subtle pressure on the ear according to the amount of pain, then succeed in the whole head; do this often until all the vertebrae are visible.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not comply, then dull the pain around the head with cotton as I have said in the stone; and if they do not succeed as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have proven effective in the opening of the vertebrae, and you will find them where you can treat with distillations; and if you distil your oils and medicines into the ear with this instrument, as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And whether of silver or of lead is placed at the small pores below, and above over the instrument to distill; and to press within the distillation with a well-made lead tool for this, and if you see take the razor and wrap around the point evenly with cotton; then pour your oil or juice, and whatever medicine you see in the can, and the can should be in the ear; then blow through the razor all the cotton, and press your hand frequently until the oil is distilled or the smell comes out of the ear; and the bad smell is inside, and the distillation is a little cooled by fire at the same time as it is distilled in the ear; and be careful that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of ear deafness
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without some sort of deafness in the ears; and this same thing happens to men by deafness from a wound, or from a thorn inside the ear, and this deafness never comes from anything that cannot be seen in the ear, and it never comes from anything else than the deafness itself.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Therefore, that which comes from inside the ear, if one cannot see it, is from severe infection in many positions, and in this case where one can see, one should put the ear to the bad side in the sun; and look inside: if you see the opening entirely of this same space where this is the form:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And let the cauterizing iron be applied equally all around, so that it does not burn the ear; if the opulation is of char cloth or the flesh of the ear, then hold it with subtle pincers and gently apply the copper, until that char is completely removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the opulation is stuck in the ear, then take a thin razor and gently heat it over the fire, then place it on the flesh of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the opulation that causes the patient to hear a grating sound, gently perforate it, and be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear; then place a tent according to the width of the puncture, and moisten it with Egyptian eye salve.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do not apply any bandage until the wound is clean, or take a tent and moisten it with rosewater, and powder it with broken glass; and if you see swelling in the ear, it is necessary to remove the tent and use another tent moistened with rosewater and beeswax, until the swelling is removed; then cure it as soon as it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if blood flows out, soak an sponge and apply cold cloths on the ear, and use other treatments that remove the flow of blood which are used to treat distillations.
de la char des papieres	of the char of the papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This is the method for treating the eyes when they are wet and dry, and you should spread them with forceps and tweezers, and the copper from its roots; then put it on the eye with a solution of sulfur.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if without removing it, the cautery of the subtle lens is used, and the cauterizer after the incision is valuable; and many times they are repaired, but nothing remains from their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	of the gravel
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Frequently in papers come things that seem to be gravel in their form and hardness, and because of this disease is called "hail", and it is an assembly of large moisture above and below; the work is such: if the hail moves from one side to another, and it is a light thing to know; then make it wide, then scrape lightly each part, then take it with pincers, and cover.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you do not cover it with a small hole in the paper, it will not hurt the patient; and if the wound is large, it gathers at an edge, and cure it as long as it is healthy; and if it is small, do not make any force, for the inflammations restore it soon and heal quickly.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the splinter is large and falls into the inner part of the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper, and hold the splinter with some pincers, and press it from one side to the other; and if the paper is moved by incision, it does not hurt anything; and when the splinter is cut, pour oil of strong salt, and cure the limb of which it has injured until the wounds are healed.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Exinach is a grease that is injured in the threads of papers above, and it has more in children than in adults, and it hurts their eyes a lot, and they vomit it in the morning, and they cannot look at the light of the sun because their tears stick to their eyes; and because they lie on their faces, they are sweaty and sleep on them, and their papers are out of their mouths moist that the exinach inflates in the oil.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the limb to your touch and feel the extraneous between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the method of the work is such that the hairs put their head in your hand; and then take a piece of linen, and make a tent in the shape of a circle according to the amount that contains extraneous from each part, then place it over it; and press on one side and the other, so that the extraneous is assembled inside the circle; then cut through the moisture at the edge of the wound with a sharp blade, not larger than the wound on the skin of the vein; and cut the skin until you come to the extraneous; and in many positions, extraneous comes from the wound, in the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Remove the splinter completely from one piece of cloth between your fingers, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is spread out; and be careful not to push it into the wound, that you do not bring all the oil up to the surface, that you do not damage it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if it does not appear at the beginning of the wound, lightly rub the wound until it appears; then remove it as we have said, then moisten and dry cloths, and put on the limb, and bandage it well.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such men who bite and put on to corrupt the moisture that is remaining.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the healer as long as they are healthy.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the healer comes to the abscess that is not yet healed, then the healer should apply soothing ointments as long as they are healthy.
des poilz des papieres	of the hairs of the papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc IIII manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When the hairs of the papers are born not natural, and are awake, if they harm the eyes, and bring on various diseases such as tears and softening of the papers and whites, as long as it is the cause of the destruction of the eyes; and the cure is in four ways: either by cauterization with fire, or by medicine as a cold compress according to what is before or the chapter on cauterization, and is done either by incision and suture or by cauterization, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you place the head of the pain in your hand, then return the paper of oil to your right hand; if it is turned over, it is good; if not, if there is a needle at the end of every thread above; and let it be on the other side of the paper or where the hairs grow beyond these hairs, and take the thread above the paper, and return it to the razor; then in the part outside the paper, outside the hairs adjusted, all the skin covered, from the big leg down to the small; then pull the thread, and place outside the paper a small tent of cotton and linen, then on top of the paper a figure of an envelope, like the belly of a mushroom, and throughout it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity you saw lift the paper which is divided into all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if you have skill to cut out a great quantity of paper according to how the paper is softened; then cut all the string on the two lines that you have marked, and begin at the large arm from great to small; and put one of the tears near the natural hairs in the groove of a root, then close the corner into one of the two angles of the key, then scrape the skin; then bring together the two lips to one seam of an needle to all the thread of the fine silk, and suck the blood, and make the excess of hairs above the two edges to any things glued, if you see that you do this; and if not, if you have no care, then leave the seam and the threads for three days or four; then cure the wound without sewing things dry and constricting, because the paper heals at the moment of the wound and its assembly, but the seam is dried (as they said the ancients), and it is work without fear; and if in another way: and that you sign the paper in a shape that is as like the figure of a mirror, as we have told, at three points according to the form that is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then apply this small force evenly according to the form that is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you cannot hold the needles, and the thing is not even, take a needle or if it has a thread, put it in the shape; and put the other thread over the great arm, and the second thread over the small one, and assemble the threads evenly between your fingers; then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin where you have marked, as we have told you, then assemble the two lips of the wound by sewing, and cure it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with salve and similar soothing ointments; and never once has the hair of the paper been converted: if you use what we have said about the incision, but the sewing on one side and the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of dogs is as follows: and it is that you convert the paper and the needle inside according to what I have said, and then make two dogs by art, and two subtle ties as long as the paper and the width of the space is; and cope with the two questions of the two parts where you hold the threads; then assemble the one and the other subtly above what overhangs the paper of the oil, and strain the two dogs from the two parties form; and leave it in this way for some time, and the skin that was stretched will die and rot and putrefy, until it falls off by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it lingers, if the copper has strong forces, then cure it until it is healed; and when the wound has been dressed, and if it was lifted with paper, and they will not grow again; and this is the form of the two cains that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The work is such that you grasp a thin needle, and you insert the silk thread so soft and thin; then assemble the threads and pull both of them subtly, and let the length of the threads be one palm long; then order the other thin silk thread briefly, and pull the main thread; then put the hairs on your skin; and let it be beyond the sun so that the work is declined, for this is a subtle and delicate work, then insert the needle throughout the work in the root of the hair raised, and pierce it into the paper gently until you pull it above the natural hair; then pull the hair up to the work, and insert that hair, if there is one or two or three or more; then pull your hand so that the hairs come out above the work with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the patient is chased and treated, and the hairs do not come out with it, then trace the chase to the end of the thread that you have ordered, until the chase comes out completely and you see it through the oil; then trace the chase and the thread, and close the oil and leave it closed for two or three days, until the hair grows back in its place and grows on the skin; and if the hairs are small, accompany one long hair from the goats naturally, and let it be raised with the one you leave, until it is lengthened and then lift it.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the impurity of the oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease, which is called "aleacrati" or the "porridge", comes in the oil, there are two ways: one natural and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it comes from wounds, or cutting, or cauterization, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the method of treatment in this is that you break that suture, and dry the lips of it, and put inside tents of linen, and bind it as long as it is healed; and one should only use in the treatment of it things that dry and restrain.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, the disease becomes worse than before; but in the work of things that soften, such as fenugreek; and the root of the sharp or high and seed of linen are cooked, and soothing ointment melted in any of the oils, and there is wrapped a tent, and the treatment of this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasures of your care are that you take heed that it does not decay according to its former form; and this work which we have said is only a guide to this disease, that it does not return according to its former form.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the oil that comes in the bone
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease which is truly called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accident comes from wounds and cuts and cauterization and similar things; and the method of the work is that you hold a needle, in which it has double thread, and the thread in the bone, and make it pierce from the left leg to the right, so that the thread comes out in two pieces of the bone; then the bone is held above the entire needle, and the cloth wide.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the paper returns to its original shape according to what it should be, it is good; if not, take the razor and put it in the groove, and turn the paper, and make two cuts within the paper; and let the two cuts of the two angles of the incision you have made meet, and make them into such an angle that when they are assembled, the shape is as if it were a letter with no «I greek»; then take that char, according to the quantity that its cost is less than what it would be without paper, then add the two missing parts, and sew them with a thread of linen; then care for what we have said about mollifying medicines and tents, until they are healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	If the disease comes from a cut or stitch or cauterization, it is necessary to make a plain cut outside of the hairs and papers, as I have said; then drain between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; and one must do the operation according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters apply various techniques depending on all possible ways to make the figure return to its natural form; and the patients themselves, according to what is necessary for the operation and tools in many different positions.
dou soudement de la papiere	of the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this suture has been done by many people in a somewhat different manner, such that the paper above is glued with the white of the oil, and it cannot move or do its work naturally, then you should go outside the paper with the point of a razor, and lift it up; and stretch it with pincers, until you scrape off what is hard to the subtle spatula, which should not be too sharp or too thin, so that the pain cannot bear that the spatula is too sharp or too thin, and makes the oil burn; and your incision, from which you scrape that assembly, should be lightly made, so that the paper returns to its natural form; and that whole assembly is healed, and nothing is ever done in harsh salt oil, and lifted with mild douche, and collodion; then place between the paper and the oil a linen tent, and put above the oil moistened wool; and afterwards use douche and remedies as long as it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the elbow joint
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	There are two ways the elbow joint can be dislocated: one is nervous and resembles a hard, swollen facet, and the other is not nervous but resembles frozen white moisture, so that when touched with iron and heated with pliers, it cannot be moved; and both start from near the large arm and grow little by little until they cover the whole eye and light and movement of the elbow.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of the incision is such that the hairs put their head in your hand, then open the eyes; and take the paper to your hand, then bend the elbow with pliers of small double, and extend it above; then take a needle, and put the hair of a horse, or a goat, or a cow, and the thread strong; and double the point of the needle a little and put it into the elbow, and push the whole needle through the elbow, and extend the elbow with a thread and above, and scrape all the hair on the side of the elbow that shows the gold and the silk to the hair just above, then cut the remaining in the root of the arm at all the subtle spatula and with small forces, and leave the natural skin of the arm, so that by the incision no blood comes out as usual; and once the elbow has been extended only at the end, and the thread, as we have said.
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be careful that the spatula does not touch the charred flesh and break it, and that the prickling does not pierce; and after the incision pour a little bit of broken silk oil, and a collar made of litharge, and leave it just as it is until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the joint is not nervous, and you cannot insert the needle, and the incisions cannot enter, often this appearance of a joint medicine is cured; and they are born as I have said in the division, and if you see it covered, then work the oil on the painful spot, and take the spatula lightly with a slightly sharp edge according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And gently rub the angle above subtly, and if you see that it does not soften and the ratio is approaching, then blow from your mouth into the oil collier made of litargire and red wax and broken silk, and extinguish the oil just after; then proceed with the other work according to this same method until it is completely healed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary in the oil, such as an abscess, then milk it, and first cure the abscess until it is healed, then proceed with the work as before until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh on the arm is night in the oil due to great harm, then soak it in a solution of one part vinegar and not too much, then pour red wine wormwood into the oil.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the eye that grows above the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Some men's hairs never grow red, and cover the pupil and restrain above the papers and turn to the after, and it seems like a rose of balm; and if the work is such that the hairs put their head in your healthy one, then work the eyes, and hold all that hair with suitable angles to this, and support it with force; then cover the first hair, and go cutting all the way to the razor just to the end, and make sure you do not bleed the oil at the work; and let the incision of the spanish fly that we have said in the incision of the nail and as small forces of which we take the base, like the form after this chapter demonstrates; and when the incision is completed and all the hair is taken, then use the oil of silk beaten or you distill red wine wormwood and similar corrosive medicines, and put on top of the oil cotton with a bit of wool, so that it is ensured that there is no apostem; and if nothing remains, and the pain does not overwhelm you, and you doubt a large apostem, then leave the oil and cure the apostem with things calming a large apostem; then return to your work until it is healthy, and thus make many hairs are treated in the oil by this similarity.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But in any case, it is necessary that you apply the cure of each oil weak from the natural way; and of the accidental way, in the work of iron; and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that this member is suffering from that work.
des voines des eulz	of the eyes' hairs
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	Before are red veins that are covered over the oil, and they damage the work and weaken the eye always.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	The work is therefore to the first that you look at this eye, in which before is, and outside, and there is no other disease besides the previous one; then do it in this way: command the pain to put its head in your healthy place, then suspend those veins all around according to its wisdom, and let the lengths be subtle double according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be two once per degree in the body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then apply those forces gently, and suck out the blood hourly after another, until you remove those veins from the oil; and beware not to pierce the oil with sharp points of spatulas, and do this work at noon before the sun, and be very hot in your work so that you do not cope with those veins; and when you have done this, distill green and red wine into the oil to corrupt what remains from before.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot collect all the blood in that hour, then apply a plaster on top of the oil with things to ease the pain of the eyes, and let it rest for some time until the pain is relieved and ensure that there is no abscess, then restart according to this method as long as it is healthy; and this is the form of forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the oil fistula
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The woman is said to have a "fistula": when you treat it with cauterization and medicine as I have mentioned before, and it does not heal, then you should pierce it at the abscess, where it must die, and drain all the moisture that is in it, until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and the blackness, then shape all the instrument that is in this form; it is called "rough head", and it should be made of iron as a nail, and pointed as it is in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place the broken bone on top of the joint, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a little until you feel that corruption is removed; and do this only once, then restore the bone with drying remedies.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the bone is set and the flesh grows, and the body of the wound is sound, it remains like this for 40 days, and it does not reopen and is not infected, and no bad accidents come, until it is healed; if not, there is no other remedy than to bring the fistula to the opening of the neck according to this form: and you must uncover the bone the second time with a knife, and with wetting medicines, and when it is uncovered take the foret according to this form, and make the iron of the third angle to the patient as you see above: and let the fistula be attenuated until the top as you see.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place it above the bone of the arm, and move your hand away from the oil and the pain, then return to the full extent of the arm until it pierces the bone and the patient feels the pain as if it were coming from the elbow; and then restore the dry medicines, as I have indicated, and when the char is born and hardens the bones, if the matter goes to the elbow, it is a lighter thing for the pain.
de l’issue de l’oil	from the end of the oil
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eye is fully open and does not dislocate again, nor become displaced, then you must bind the pain; then clean it, then place suction cups or hats made of iron to draw out the pus, then place above the eye an ointment made of acacia, aloe, incense, and sarcocollis, and then strain the oil, and apply the bandage and cloths; and the manner of the cloths is that you take cloths that are soft enough, and double each in four, and then place one on top of the other according to the quantity they need; then strain it through a strong cloth, and start suction again without causing pain; then remove the suction and leave the oil strained day and night, and if the eye becomes displaced, you must strain it more; then remove the ointment after the morning and night, and if you see the oil is healing, it is good; if not, start again with the bandage and cloths and ointment and suction until they are healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	forced removal of a burst bladder
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions occur in the burst bladder, then open it, and there comes forth a great deal of paper-like substance, like a grain of resin, and it is difficult to see; therefore, if you see it covered, the work is such that you would stick a needle into the root of the part below this above, then stick another needle or a double thread of the part of the arm; and let it pierce, and leave the first needle according to its disposition; then cover the thread double and tie a part of the bladder around it, and hold it well, then pull out the needle and put on the oil lotion in abundance of urine; and let it stay until the thread has healed with the bladder, then care for the oil of things that comfort until the wound is healed; and never once the wound is restrained by the bladder from every part of a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes appear greatly swollen, pierce them with a fine needle that comes from underneath the oil, and remove the moisture and descend to the eyelids, and enter them immediately; then extract them until they are healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	from beneath the oil
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease that is called "alcunnati" is nothing other than a swelling that is gathered in the oil, resembling acute downward, and it is not acute; and the manner of its appearance is such that you make the patient sit upright and straight, then take the head between your hands from two parts, and move the mouth until you see the swelling coming up to your eyes; then sew it up, and do not descend and be dismantled in the light, and see the things as they should be; and if it does not descend, it is acute, and if it descends from the swelling, it is not as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you let the pain rest between your hands, then take the thin spatula and make it over the corneal suture and the continuation of the conjunctive with the corneal suture and the crown, until the wound is open; and when it is open, then pour hot honey mixed with oil, or honey boiled with fenugreek and honey, then let it be cured by other cure until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	of the oils of the oil
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have seen similar oils in the division, and what is needed to pierce; if it works according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	It is necessary that you make the hurt part between your hands crossed, outside of the light for the sun, and with the clean oil pressed and strongly stretched; then place the paper of the oil in your right hand if the hairs are on the left, or in your left hand if the hairs are on the right; then take in your right hand if the hairs are on the left, the instrument called «almagda», or in your left hand if the hairs are on the right; then place the point of the instrument above the crown by the thickness of a rat in the part of the oil that is between the big toe and the little toe, then strike the instrument called «almagda» vigorously, and withdraw your hand until it pierces into the part of the oil, and feel that almagda comes to the empty thing; and it is necessary that the measure of the way almagda be at the front of the measure of the space that is from the moon to the end of the nail; and this is the crown of the oil; if you see the bone in that paper for the clarity of the cloth, and then place the instrument above it where the sharp is, then extract one after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	if he is now sharp, he sees the hairs before him and the instrument in his eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After a short rest, if he is sharp again, raise the second vein, put the sponge with the instrument, and when it is firmly attached and does not rise, gently turn around your hand a little and a little; then put in a small piece of silk, and leave it in the wound.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then put by default the oil soaked or linen cloth in rose oil and plenty of honey, and tie with clean oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those who are of our kind, put on top with plenty of honey.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the needle cannot enter the oil due to its hardness, because there are some people who have very hard eyelids, then you must use the tool called "alberit", which has this form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And then pierce only the conjunctive, and do not go too far in front, but make the eye subtle, then bolt the hardness, as we have said; and at the completion of the work compare to the patient's sleeping position, in which he sleeps on his back in the dark room; and with all movements, take light foods, and do not move his head to the right or left, and be tied according to his disposition for this time; then release him in the same dark room, and test his vision, and see some things, and then return the bandage after seven days; and it does not matter that you do this in the evening of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary to raise the eyelid quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	When abscesses come, you should apply a poultice before the seventh hour, and bring it to the mouth of the wound to drain the pus; and when it is drained, remove the cloth and put on a new one to cover the wound, and let it stay in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then slowly bring it out of the house and return to its place; and heal that no disciple should interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	Some came to us who was of the Yrach, who told us that in some countries people would make all kinds of arrows, where they succeed the sharpness, but I have never seen any in our land, nor have I read it in any books of the ancients; perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the similarities of the forms of alchemy, because those who do not know them see them as such; and they are made of pure tin properly.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And they are the chief of those from this same subtlety, and the latter in three angles equal.
de la char sor le neis	of the healing of the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	No blisters or boils ever arise from the nose, of which there are some that seem like scorpions at the root; and if there are such, or if there is a blister of a good color, and if there is a blister of a good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In those blisters that are of a good color, and not enchanted, it is necessary to place the pain between your hands against the sun; and work its nostrils, and pour the droplet into those blisters, and draw them out; because this corresponds to what you can support in the subtle spirit agitated from one part, until you know that that blister is completely hardened.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains nothing that can be covered, open it with all the subtle instruments lightly, so that nothing remains; and if without you are overcome, or an abscess forms, remove it as it should be; and if they are malignant abscesses, hurry and cauterize until the wound is not stained and all the pus is removed, then pour out or cleanse with a solution of salt and vinegar.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If the wound does not heal, and moisture enters the palate, if it is not cleansed, there may be pus in the bone above, because the instruments do not come out well; therefore, it is necessary to bring a piece of linen thread, thick enough to hold with our hands, and space out each nut according to how much or little; and put the bad parts of the thread into the patient's mouth, and pull it through the nose until it comes out of the mouth; many times they do this in schools, and it is an easy thing for someone who wants to do it; then hold the thread that comes out of the nose with one hand, and the other thread that comes out of the mouth with the other hand, and clean each one after the other as we do with our fingers.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Do this until you know that they have not corrupted that part of the bone, then remove the son, soak the blood, and moisten the thread in Egyptian egg yolk, and return it to the nose as before; do this three times or more, until the eggshells corrode all that remains of the bone; then place a piece of bread under the nose for several days until it is healed, and if there is a need for dry medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument for purging the head, by which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And it should be of silver or tin, shaped like an open lamp, such as a dog, and bring it thus; and if you see, make a closed dog, and let the instruments be plain for purging the head; and have one hand on the head to hold when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the shoulder joint
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Frequently, a disease arises at the shoulder joint, which is called "telul", and it grows and becomes large over time; and for this reason, it is necessary to cover it from the beginning, and to apply the entire bone, then put the fire cautery or the burning medicine on it; and if one delays in covering it until it is large, if it is hard, of poor color, and insensitive: if one does not touch it with iron because it is an infected abscess, for when one covers it, great harm comes to the patient; and if the abscess is softly touched, not with iron, and you see that one can cover it entirely, then remove the pain and cure the limb of similar things and restrain them.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nose is cut off and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	when solutions of continuity come from one of these cartilages, it is rare and only in some people
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, if the wound is fresh and full of blood, look to see if the lips are split on both sides; then stitch them together at the seam, and treat it until it heals; and if the lips are already split on one side and not the other, it is necessary to scorch all the parts that are not yet healed, then gather the two lips together at the seam, hold them in place, and powder with dragon’s blood powder and frankincense; and put the powders on a piece of strong or other plaster, and let it soak through, then treat the wound until it heals.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The method of sewing is such that you assemble the needle: either by needles, as we have said in the sewing of the belly; or by thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses on the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the mouths of people, there are abscesses inside the lips, hard and small, and smaller and larger; therefore it is necessary to turn the lips, and cut under each one, and take out the pus with tweezers and clean every part; then apply the leek after incision of broken glass, until the wound is not soaked; and then apply the oil of eucalyptus, and cure the wound of dry things until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	of the teeth's gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Often, abscesses arise above the gums, which the ancients called "albulus"; therefore, you should hold them with forceps, and cut at their root, and let out the pus or blood; then put on the tooth a vitriol powder broken into pieces, or other restrictive and desiccating powders; and if this gum returns after incision, and often does, then cut again, and cauterize: if it does not return after cautery, these are the forms of instruments to cover.
des sordens	of deafnesses
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes, abscesses are assembled at the root of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, scars that are ugly and sharp; and sometimes they are black and yellow and green, as far as corruption reaches the gum, and are bad-smelling teeth; therefore, you should put the painful thing between your hands, and its cause in your holy place, and extract the teeth or scars as long as nothing remains; and thus make black and yellow and green, and yellowish and others, until they are all cleaned; and if what is at the first layer is good, it is good; if not, start again on the second day and the tool, until you have removed everything; and know that teeth have business with various forms of tools to remove, because the tool used to remove between the teeth has other forms than those used to remove between the teeth; and these forms and others should be prepared by you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	When treating a toothache, you should pull the tooth as much as possible, as no one should do this; for it is a substance very high just above us that we have no excuse to remove.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Then, when the tooth is painful to pull, it is necessary that you be certain of the tooth hurting.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Many times, the pain of the tooth is relieved, and make sure it is not a bad tooth, and pull the good tooth; and then the pain does not depart, until the evil ones are extracted, for we have already done this to these saints; and when you are certain of the tooth hurting, it is necessary that you burn around the tooth in all places; then move it with your fingers or subtle tweezers at the first and second point, until it is well dislodged, then firmly hold the tweezers; and let the one who has the pain in your holy place between your teeth, and hold it so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extracting the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not jump out, take one of these instruments and push it lightly into each part, and shake it as you did first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the tooth is pierced and damaged, it is necessary to fill it with cloths where the pulp is; and if the extraction is subtly held by roots, that it does not break when extracting; and it is very important to cover around the gum to remove the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And be careful not to break it, and that a part remains, and reapply to the pain by the greater evil of the root more severe pains of the first.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And beware that you do not act in such a way as the ignorant saint does, who by their haste and boldness break the chariot once and for all, and never bring back what we have told; but bring forth once again through the quackery of this great disease due to the roots that they delay, or due to the chariot that they break, as often as we have seen; and when the density is traversed, wash the limb with wine or oil and salt; and if blood flows out, which often happens, use the limb of vitriol broken; and if it does not work, cauterize.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The forms of instruments, by which one moves the first teeth, should be long pointed and large handed, so they do not double up when you pull out the tooth; and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should be large enough so they do not bend when pulling, and they should be made of well-made iron, and they should be shaped to hold the tooth.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the tooth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains when pulling, it is necessary that you put a soft cotton wool moistened in oil or butter on the tooth.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	As long as the tooth is softened, then pull the pliers which are called "algefri", of which the patient resembles a beak; and they should be made inside like a wedge and this is the form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	If the roots do not want to come out at all these needles, it is necessary that you dig around the root entirely, and put the tool called "althali", which is a spatula, of which this is the shape:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And if it is too thick so that it does not break immediately, and if the root jumps up through the hole, it is good; if not, if you help with all the tools, of which these shapes come after:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you help with this tool that has two prongs, of which this is the shape:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other tools that are before in the range of the teeth, and with this tool that seems like large needles, of which this is the shape:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And this instrument is different from others that it cannot break, and sharp that many of the instruments of dense are; and also other instruments, which are not mentioned; and the wise masters find by themselves their instrument, according to what their works and the disease show them, for there are some diseases where the ancients did not teach any instrument for the diversity of them; and if they break the carriage or other bones, or if it does not help, if they look for the instruments that are necessary, as I have told you, and help with gestures, from which this is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And be thick and strong to hold the bone, so it does not escape, but it can hold and remove; then restore the limb to medicines appropriate for this, and if there is rot in the bone, and it is small, then use all of this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not straight along the natural pathway, and its shape is ugly, and especially in young women, then it is necessary to remove the tooth if it is not in the right position, and it cannot be straightened or filed; then use this tool which has a shape similar to a small beak, and it is made of iron with a sharp edge:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the copper pounded gently over time due to the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can be removed, then the copper is shaped like this:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	And it is also like the shape of the copper from which arrows are made; and in the copper, gently pound the tooth over time, so that it does not move until it breaks; then, at the end, use a file with no roughness at all, and if the tooth is too sharp and it cuts the tongue, it must be filed until it is even, so that it does not cut the tongue or corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the teeth are loose
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the teeth in front are loose, whether by impact or by falling out, and the pain cannot be relieved because they cannot be held down to prevent them from falling, and you treat them with restrictive medicines, it does not work; then you must bind them with a gold wire, for the silver wire turns green and rots, but the gold never changes; and let the thread be neither too thin nor too thick, according to the quantity of the space between the teeth; and if you see that the teeth are loose, take the thread and double it between the two healthy teeth, then place the injured tooth or teeth in the middle, as many as there are, until you can safely reach the healthy tooth on the other side; then begin to cover the injured part again, and gently and skillfully tighten your hand until it does not move; and let your thread be attached to the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then thread the threads with a wire, and assemble them, and place them between the healthy teeth, so that they do not bite the tongue; then leave them tightly clenched as long as possible, and if they loosen, or the wire breaks, then use another wire; if it holds, it will serve in this way for the entire time, and this is the form of the teeth and the arrangement of two healthy teeth, and two missing teeth, as you see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth breaks, if you reset it in its place, from fresh to fresh, as we have said; and do not interfere with it until it is wise and painful, and never once is the shape of a cow's bone tooth made, and you put it in the place of the deficiency, and you tighten it as we have said, and hold it so for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	of covering the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	There is no joint that comes out of the tongue or by nature, which one is born thus; or by accident of a wound; and the works are such that you open the mouth with the pain, and hold the head in your own, and lift the tongue; then cover the nervous part of the large, until the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there is hardness or no, and it is by a severe wound, if you beat the one and cover the other loosely; and be careful that the wound does not become too much in front, for the artery which is out; and when you have done, lift the shoulder of high rose and vinegar, or high cold, then put the tongue out of a linen tent; and the pain every night, so that the wounds cannot suppurate.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if blood comes out, apply vinegar to the wound; and if it does not stop bleeding, cauterize with slow-burning coal, which is good for the skin; then care for the wound until it heals.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see that the wound is red or black or hard, and the patient does not feel pain, do not touch it, for it is a chancre; and if it is inclined to suppurate and there is moisture, pour water through a fine sponge, and deliver it from both sides; and if it does not stop bleeding, apply vinegar until it stops. Then remove the bandage and care for other wounds until it heals.
des apostemes de la gorge	of neck abscesses
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	No time comes from within the neck boils that are called "godath", and they are properly called the II mandibles, and when you treat them as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, then take care: if it is an abscess hard of small sense and of pus color, do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, rather for the flow of blood; but let it be until it is ripe, and then you will break it, or it will break by itself; and if it is of white color and the root is thin, have prepared the instrument to cover, but first check that the abscess does not rest and is calm.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Then place the injured part in front of the sun, and its joint should be in its proper position, and the work of the mouth and the spear of the sergeants between his hands, and press the tongue out of all the instrument, from which this is the form; and it should be of silver or thin brass as some knives:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	If you press the tongue with all this instrument, and you see the abscess, take the needle and the cotton in the amber, and the thread above as much as you can; and take nothing from the cloth with it, then cover the instrument with the thread, which resembles a forceps; and everything else is curved, one part the other, and they are very sharp, and it is made of iron or tin:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, if you have a pair of pliers, here is its form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And on one side, it is sharp, and on the other side, it is blunt; and when you have gripped one of the tongs, grip the other in the same manner, and after the incision, gargle the sharp pains with hot, sharp, and soothing water, and if blood comes out, gargle the sharp pains with hot, sliced green apples or mint leaves, and similar things, until the mouth is clean; then cure it as much as possible; and never do any other incisions in the throat except the two tongs, so grip them in the same way as the two tongs.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman with an abscess that was nestled within her throat, specifically a small abscess; and it had almost completely closed off her entire throat, so much so that the woman could not breathe or swallow, and she died if she remained like this for one day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so high that it had been filled with two drams of pus through the two pores of the neck.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I therefore immediately pierced one incision into the abscess, then through the great wound, and a large portion of blood; then I made another incision into the other pore of the neck, and pressed against her mouth and tongue; after piercing the incision into these abscesses, and taking out a part, and not more than a small amount of pus came out; thus the woman's breathing was relieved from the obstruction in her throat, and she began to drink water and wine, and did not stop cutting away at this abscess for a long time; the abscesses kept recapping and filling up the space that I had emptied, until it became very large; therefore I pushed and cauterized it from within her throat: thus it did not grow again; and I left these parts, and only God knows what happened to her afterwards.
de l’uve	of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When removing from the eye, and it is infected and long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is round and large, it is called "uvula".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help much, and you see that the abscess is calmed, and it is thin, then you should drain it; and the one that is round and not long; and if it is bloody or dark red or black, then you should avoid incision of the abscess.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger in the pain.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	When you see it, according to the method that I have mentioned, of its length and breadth, that you make the hairs sit in front of the sun, and press the tongue against the instrument that we have mentioned before; then put the needle into the wound, and draw out the arrow, and cut it with one or two of the instruments that I have mentioned in the incision of the two arrows.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And it is necessary that you cut off only the excess that is beyond the natural end; for if you cut more, it will cause great pain to the voice, and speech; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two arrows, and treat it until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the pain is intolerable, then it is necessary to use a cauterizing instrument for the sensation of pain.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	The method of the cauterizing instrument is sharp and pointed.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And the patient places his head on your shoulder, and then presses the tongue against the instrument that we have said in the chapter of cauterization, and applies with sharp and live fire, so that it is not too thick or too clear; and in moving this instrument, it is like this:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the head has a hair or object that puts the medicine, like the movements of a spoon, and puts the instrument on all the medicine on the gum; and the patient is lying on his side, so that the saliva and the muscle drip from the mouth of the medicine inside, so that it does not descend to the throat and the blood; then hold your hand on all the medicine and press it on the gum for half an hour, until you see the medicine is healing and the effects of the medicine are calmed; and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and wipe the cotton in the medicine, and blow the instrument through all the cotton into the cavity above, until the cotton is burned on the gum; and do this often, until the cauterization of the medicine is perfect, then let it dry for four or five days. And if you have to start the cauterization of the medicine again, start it again, and after the cauterization stitch it around the gum with cotton soaked in honey, and clean what is around the medicine; and be covered with sharp cold, and be treated with gargles until they are healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer from incision than cauterization; if it is cured by fumigation in this way, take camomile and hyssop and origanum and rue and chamomile and avronne and similar herbs, and put them all or some of them in a pot, and add vinegar; and let the pot be well glued with strong earth, and in the pot have an instrument like this:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And it should be of silver or lead, and it should be one of the ends of the instrument inserted into the patient's mouth until the vapor rises to the eye through the nose, until the eye is dead; after that, it is repeated often, until the eye is dry, and keep in mind that you do not make this at the beginning of the arrival of the abscess, for many things happen; and do not make this unless at the decline of the abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	If this instrument is not present, take a cloth and place it inside the head with an egg shell, so that the mouth does not have too much heat; for the egg shell does not make much steam to burden the mouth, and this is a good cure together with safety.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times it is necessary to remove an object from the throat or fish bone, or nothing at all; therefore you must take out what you can see, and press the tongue against the sun at all the instruments, so that you can see the thing; and what does not open and is returned in the throat, it is necessary to make the patient vomit the object as soon as the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps if the object is stuck by vomiting; or the object swallowed a piece of sponge, or a piece of naval, or a lettuce root, or a piece of dry bread; and tie the sponge to the thread, and then swallow it; and when it comes to the stomach, it will stick, and then pull out the object; and if it does not come out of what we have said, take the instrument from the bottom according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the instruments be curved to the head so that they can more lightly enter the throat, and raise the head high; and guard that you do not touch the epiglottis, that it does not come to him, nor put the bone inward; and it is better that the hairs push the instrument, because it is softer or the thing is as such; if the push goes down, or it pulls the instrument throughout equally, until it is full.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the throat's flesh
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	There is no medicine for the throat's flesh, as I said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when it does not improve, then look at the throat's hair to the sun, then that you press the tongue against the instrument that I have told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	If you see the sinew, then trace it all with a small needle, or with fine needles that are worth the eye.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if it is not worth it, then take a hairy cat, and beat the hair of the sore with it, then beat or move the hair of the cat against the iron, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the wound is tainted all day long.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take a full bucket of cold water, and work the mouth, and pour it in the direction of swallowing, and move it to his hand often; and when the sinew soon feels the cold, then stop.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if she does not sneeze as we have said, then steam the wound with asafetida using the instrument I mentioned in the fumigation of the grape; do this many times, for it will eventually clear.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the manner of the fumigation is that you hold a pot with burning charcoal or where it has charcoal, and place the cover over it with a perforated lid in the middle, and in that puncture the instrument; then pour your fumigation, and put the head of the cat in its mouth, and close its mouth, so that the fume does not escape but enters through the nose; and the nose will now sneeze, and if it does not, then repeat the fumigation many times; and let the patient suffer thirst, and eat salted things and others, and do not drink anything sharp; and thus it is necessary that she should be cured by this treatment.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the tool used to treat the jaw, so that when one can see it, it resembles a hooked tong depressor to enter the throat; and it has the appearance of a beak, and there is an abrasiveness of lime, so that whatever it takes, it cannot wear out; and here is its shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapters on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	Many kinds of abscesses are, according to what the memory comes after one and another in this book, and they differ in perforation and cut; and it is in two ways that one is in its own likeness, and because it retains moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second method is for those who are at the neck.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscess of the chief is other than that of the foundation, and the abscess of the neck is other than that which comes in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if there are abscesses that one should not pierce until the boil is dead according to its completion; and if there are such as it is necessary to pierce when they are crusty, and do not die according to their completion, as abscess which are beyond joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscess comes beyond joints, and it is left until it is surrounded by, perhaps because the ligament and the nerve of the joint are corrupted, by which this is the cause of contraction in that member.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	When the abscess is located deep within the limb, and if you delay perforation until it has died, it will harm the main limb; or if it is located deep within the foundation, if you pierce it too late, it will not be able to pass through, and will remain long inside, and there comes a fistula; and it cannot be healed in a short time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it is necessary to remove the head of the perforation of the abscess that has died according to its completion, and this is when the pain is relieved, and the departure of the fever, and the lessening of the pain and inflammation, and the lessening of the debatement and the easing of the main abscess, and the other signs; and it is necessary to make the perforation where more dependent on the abscess, and where it opens most; and if the perforation is long in the body, and if the abscess is at the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all equal places where there is no pus.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In these cases, according to the affected limb.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when abscesses are in the limb, it is better to leave the puncture until it is confirmed that digestion has been completed, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you puncture it before then, it may cause the vein to bleed heavily, and it is painful due to much feces; and perhaps it hardens the lips and penetrates deeply into him.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if any abscess that are punctured according to the width of the vein, according to what the limb has need of.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And it is necessary that you incise small abscesses, small pustules; and in large abscesses, large pustules, and many cuts according to the similarity of the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses or it is necessary to cover them with a cloth, and bandage; when they have become as soft as cloth, and are mortified, then it is necessary to do as one does with bubbles: and if there are such abscesses that are cut into three angles, and if there are such that one covers as the fleece of wool, and others cover as abscesses; and if there are such that one makes a round shape, and other shapes and coverings.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	For those who do not have a head, if the wound is superficial, it is necessary to lance it clearly; and if the abscess is large, and there is much pus, and you lance it, do not draw out all the pus in one hour, but take out a part; then stop the abscess on the other side, then take out nothing else; do this gradually, many times, until all the pus is out; specifically if the wound is of weak virtue, or carried by women, or small children, or old decrepit people.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the experienced never dare to touch the wound with the discharge of the pus, because by chance the wound may die, and you will not be harmed.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, dry the wound, and check if the abscess wound is small; and if a tailor complains, mend it with linen or wool cotton; and if there are large abscesses, and there is much pus, it is necessary that you stuff each one with a tent so that they come together; and if you have cut into the abscess a part of the skin, and you have pulled it around, it is necessary that you fill it with old cotton or rags of linen against moisture, and tie it just above the wound; then open, and treat the dressing as long as they are healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if blood flows from your work, apply sharp cold and oily, and wipe the cloth, and put it on the affected area for many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the blood flow persists, apply government and care, and the powders I have mentioned in this book, and if it is very tense or if the wounds are very painful, it is recommended that you put on bandages and clean with wine and oil; and if it is in a swollen state, and the wounds are charred, it is recommended that you put on bandages and clean with cold and oil, or with wine and oil warm, as we have said; then drain the abscess and dress and heal, as it should, until it is healthy.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And it is necessary to know this universally in the treatment of abscesses: now I have told you how to proceed before treating abscesses, and here is the chapter.
des soros	of swellings
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	When small abscesses come from the chest, and are like those in cloth, like the lance of a goose, and there are many similar ones.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are also some large and such ones that have moisture like fish; and there are some that are hard and rough to cut through, and there is no doubt if the artery is not against it.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of the belly is that you prove with every tool called "entromissoire", from which the shape comes after, something it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, it does so by going through the long one.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is drained, scrape off the hair that contains that moisture, for it will stay in place if you leave nothing; then dip cotton in Egyptian oil, if it is present; if not, in vinegar and salt, and apply to the wound, and leave it there until the next day; and this will prevent what remains from sticking.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then, as before, the second day, and the third, until you are sure it will not remain overnight; then treat the wound with ointment suitable for its condition until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	If the abscess is large, then cover it with this form, long; and pour in your ointments, and scrape the skin from all parts, and put all your care into drawing out the pus from where it lies; and if the artery causes contrary, do as I have told you afterwards.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also do this if the abscess is pierced, and cut and cure as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And when cutting above the abscess, if it is more superficial, because it contains little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if some of these abscesses or swellings have no moisture, and among them were the abscesses I had seen or the swelling of an old woman; and I found the abscess like a hard, rough, and white stone, and could not break it; and if anyone tried to cut it, they would make as bad a wound as from a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses coming or swelling, those that come at the root of the children and at the roots of the ears, the opening should always be at the most dependent part, to let the pus out; and treat them as appropriate.
des scrophules	of hiccoughs
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times have there been abscesses at the neck, and they are dislodged with difficulty, and they are painful, and sometimes they come from other parts of the body or chest, and they are very large, and they are intertwined with each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each hiccup is properly within its own side, as with the one and the abscess of the head, as we have said; and the similarities of these hiccups are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and there are some that are malicious and do not wish to obey to health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	In that one then that you see of good disposition in the touch, and is similar to the color of the blood, and is mute from every part and is not attached to any nerve, artery, or conduit, and is not deeply set; it is necessary that you cut it from above, and scrape every part, and let the two lips of the wound come together as they should, if you have skill, as we have said in abscesses of the head; and take out little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, and do not make it too thin, that the hand does not slip, and do not look too early, before you cover what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not allow you to stop bleeding, put in the wound vinegar broth, or some powders that stop bleeding, and stop the wound; and leave it until the abscess is soothed, and the wound is softened, and begin to poultice.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the wound is clean, return to your work, until you complete it; then consult your indicator whether there are any small scabs left, and cut them and remove them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a large vein at the root of the scab, then it is not necessary to cut that scab at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it drop through, without causing harm; then fill the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian oil, then treat it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you remove the entire scrophule, it is necessary to gather the two lips of the wound and hold them together, as there is no remaining superfluity due to the size of the scrophule.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	it is necessary to cover the root of it and draw out the forceps, and hold it as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those scrophules that have superfluity, pierce the place where it opens to die; and pierce in this way as before mentioned, depending, then apply bandages and similar things, so that it does not corrupt what is left of the corruption; and when the wound is well dressed, the cure of bandaging with charcoal until it is healthy.
de squinance	of squinting
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients spoke and said of the throat-cutter; but I have never seen such a person in our land, and it is their written word.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	For those who have squinting, it is necessary that the edge of the throat, which is called "epiglottis," be avoided; and this cannot be helped because all the veins and the source of the evil are in those who have abscesses largely in the mouth, or in the throat, or in the tonsils.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the source of the veins, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the danger of strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	It is therefore necessary, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, that we cut it outside of three circles or four with a small cut through between the two circles or by the quantity of the cut of the throat, not in the cartilage; and those cuts are convenient for the section of the epiglottis that there is no char, and the vessels are long and do not bleed.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the master is afraid, it is necessary that he stretches the skin of the neck all around, then cuts the throat until it reaches the windpipe; and avoid the vessels of blood, if you see anything, and then cover the wound as we have said; and it is demonstrated by the section of the stream of the windpipe that flows through the bone which is broken, and by the lack of voice; and leave the wound open a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the hour is passed when there is doubt of strangulation, gather both lips of the wound together, and cover it entirely without the cartilage; then administer medicines that cause blisters to rise until they are healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasis says that one should not do this juice so long as the throat is completely stopped up, and the hairs are judged to be dead, and the defect has drained away.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Therefore one should cover the epiglottis for this reason that the hairs cannot maintain, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is saved from death; and because they commanded the ancients to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease has passed, and it has passed in three days or four. And then they commanded to sew up the wound and heal, as long as it was healed; and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw that a young lady took a knife, and stabbed herself in the throat, and cut part of the windpipe; and I was called to cure her, and found her as if dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the arrow that had come out of it, and although she had not bled from the vein except through the throat, and the blood flowed out through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hurried, and sutured the wound, and cured it until it was healed; and the young lady did not die because she was called back to life, and returned to her usual condition; for I believe that in the tissue of the epiglottis there is no fear.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	This abscess is called "hernia of the throat", and it is a large abscess in color like jelly, and it is very common in women; and it occurs in two ways: natural or accidental; or naturally without cause.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accidental one occurs in two ways: one is similar to a large abscess, and the other way is similar to an abscess that comes from our artery; and it causes fear, and should not be operated on except by a skilled surgeon who is small and experienced: if you find it like the large abscess, and cannot be removed at all, then treat it as you would a large abscess, and cover it with a bandage if there is none; and examine it closely and treat it properly until it is completely healed.
des nous	The fire cautery in
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	Many ways of us are, of which I will say all the similarities; and now it is necessary for me to tell the difference that is between us and the other.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that the other is cold and feverish, as long as the boils have not passed, and is accompanied by the purging; then the fever and cold rest.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With ours there is neither cold nor fever nor pain, and it contains the syphilitic ulcer, which is its own pus and is according to the color of the body, and begins like a small sore, and becomes large; and they are similar in two ways, either dry or moist, and many colors are as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	When you come to the care of a new patient, it is necessary to first test and inquire about the use of an instrument called "entromissoire", according to its form as it appears in the following chapter.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the manner of inquiring about abscesses is that you hold or press on a moist cloth in the abscess, and return your fingers slowly and gradually, until you know that the instrument has pierced through, then according to the size of the abscess; then extract the entromissoire, and be careful that it does not slip.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If the wound is moist and has a discoloration, treat it as I have described for other abscesses; and if after the incision, there is no more moisture, then scrape it thinly, and then scrape off the skin from every part and remove the flesh where it sticks, and take out the tissue with a clean cloth; and if you cannot take it out cleanly, then tear it off in pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	And if nothing remains, then it returns many times; and if it stays for a short while and does not bother you, then fill the wound with some corrosive powders, and hold the wound, and put on things to calm the abscess, and treat other wounds until it is healed; and if it is large, then cut out both lips of the wound, and treat what remains with char.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	And if it is contrary to you or another, and you hurry and fill the wound with broken glass, and leave it for two days or three, until the wound heals, and rest the blood clot; then return to cover what was left behind.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	See the shapes of the probes used for puncturing, and there are three ways: large, medium, and small; and there are three quarters that are called "albaret", and one that is called "breb", and there are three ways: large, medium, and small, to search for the abscess of fistula; and they are also like the arrows that one buys the pots with, and are made of yellow gold, or iron, or silver, and are worth as much as those that are already yellow, and are more expensive because of the black plague for searching for the openings of fistula; and there are three ways: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the holes.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The shapes of the nails are of many similarities, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and if there are nails with two claws of three ways; and if there are nails with three claws, and they are also of three ways; and if there are nails with two claws, and a single claw, and they are of three ways; and all these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The chief of these that are made are sharp, and there are some that do not cut except in one part, from which we remove the nails, so that they do not cut the vein or the nerve; and these are called awls, which are replaced in needles, so that the patient does not suffer at the opening of the abscesses; and they are of three kinds: large, small, and medium, as you see; and one uses only a small one in the case of a limb that is chapped, such as legs, arms, and breasts, and angles, and similar parts; and never made any other instrument small, like the scrapers of pustules, according to this form, with which we drain blood:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it is never placed back in its place which can cope with veins, and arteries, and once again returns according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Never inflate the breasts of some men when they begin to rot, as they seem like breasts of a woman; and they remain swollen and inflamed, and whoever wants to cure them, if it is necessary to follow this form of this line .b. until .g.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	then scrape the fat, and fill the wound with healing char, then stitch together the two lips of the wound by sewing, and treat it until it is healed; and if the breast sinks down, and is greasy like women, then cut into the ribs above, by similar cuts; because one holds to the other at the end of one and the other, so that the largest line contains the smallest according to this form, from this line .b. until the line .g.; then scrape the skin which is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about sewing and powders, and what is necessary in the cure, until it is healed; and if it is not healed, or the incision is not made completely, because the pains do not want to rest, or due to the flow of blood, then it is necessary to fill the wound with moistened cotton gauze in a corrosive ointment; and let it remain until it melts the remaining fat, then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses of the ankles
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come from the ankles are ways of hard scrofulous nodes or they have sides, and there are those that contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Therefore, those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from the line b to the line g:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus that is in the abscess is drained, then apply old cotton to the wound and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with an ointment suitable for this as long as it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	If the abscess is similar to a scrofula, then treat it as we have said in treating scrofula wounds, and if the wound opens again, then cauterize it as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the bursting of an artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	If the artery bursts and the skin above is hard, then there are often abscesses and also blood in the vein; and if you know it is for the artery, then the abscess is long and pointed; and when you feel it with your fingers, it is firm; and when it is for the vein, it is red and swollen; and it is foolish to cover this abscess, and especially when it is outside of the bones and joints and collarbone and many other places, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, it is necessary to avoid the use of the iron, and the one who is in charge should also avoid it, and in the one who is inflamed by an artery flowing through the long skin; then open the belly with a needle, and pull out the artery as far as it is exposed; then stop it with a double thread of silk, according to what I have indicated in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples; then do not touch the skin between the two strands of the fascia until the pus is removed, and remove the abscess; then treat the wound as directed, until it is healed; and if the abscess is for the belly, if you dip your hand in the pus that comes from the abscess to all the skin, then pull out the needle with the thread that you hold in your hand, and poke it through the other side; then tie the abscess as I have said, or the thread of one of the two parts of the needle at the incision of the first needle, and if you doubt that the thread will not stick, then take another needle with a full length of thread, and pull it through all the abscess in four strands; then cover the abscess until the excess is removed, then cover the wound and leave what is attached; then put on a moist cloth soaked in wine and oil, then treat the wounds and inflammations until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses of the neck
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	As abscesses come in the artery and vein, abscesses also come to the neck when it is cut, or from too much work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And it often happens more frequently in the assistance and the doubtful cases, and in all of them where there are joints, and this is very bad abscesses, and its color resembles the color of the body, and it is in many positions with pain; and when one stretches it, it causes great pain, and it is not in the same position as the body, but outside the skin; and it moves from all parts, and does not go forward or backward, nor up or down, and those who are in joints do not usually cover them with iron: perhaps they have contraction; and those who are on the head or face, making the skin to the spasm.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, if it has a point at its base, and the copper at its root; and if it is large, if it is suspended from its base, and scraped, then the bone, and remove the skin, then the bone and assemble the wound at the seam, and the cure until it is healed.
des grosses boces pendans	of large boils hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	There are no times when they occur in the belly and nowhere else, and it is a disease called "fungus" by its resemblance to mushrooms, and it has subtle roots, and large heads; and there are small and very large ones; and I saw the man who had two or three in his belly that were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had thin roots, and were cut open with moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I copied and found in one XVIII ounces heavy, and in the other VI З., and the workings in the incision is that you look if the hairs are moist, and the color of the arrow is white and moist and of subtle root; if the copper has a wide spatula, and they are in your presence the fire cautery.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For in the cutting often comes too great bleeding of blood, and if you do not see the hair spouting and painful from the incision of the iron, then take the thread of good material, and tie the arrow as we have said, and leave it for two days; and then restrain, and do not cease to stretch the thread of good material until it covers the arrow, and cut through it with work; and if the roots are large, then pour directly onto the belly, but you should well cover the half, then cauterize that it does not return; then care for the wound, and guard that you do not cover the flesh which is of pale color and poor sense and of light look.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For these infected abscesses, I will come to treat chancres later on.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the patient is bound, he should be placed in a dark room.
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the appearance of the blister comes from fire wound or cut of the face, and is above the belly and among some of the blisters, as it has in other wounds, of blood that cuts veins or arteries according to what is before, or of pus; and if it is from the cut of the face and from the outlet of the feces, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the blood, and it is a light thing without pain, and open from various outlets.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is for the issue of the intestine, then it is most diverse, and when one presses at both sides, it returns, and perhaps it is torn, and enlarges greatly at the entrance of the bath and for great labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is for moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when one presses at the hand, do not constrain too much; and if it is for blood, it opens greatly by these signs of the abscesses, which are thick and hard, and is filled with a quantity; and if it is for windiness, it is soft to the touch, and the work appears whether it is for the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If you must leave the care.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	If the appearance is for the intestine or the boil, it is necessary to command the patient to dye his hair, and be stretched straight all around, then sign all around the belly; then command him to lie quietly between your hands, then go around the limb that you have marked with a sharp instrument, then stretch half of the abscess above the large incision; then tie it tightly with a strong silk thread, or a firm rope, and let the intestine rest on it; if you pull the intestine, if you release it, and bring the intestine out through the belly; and if you pull the boil, if you take it at the base, and cut off the excess; and if the artery makes it against you, or the vein, go around slowly, then return to your work and take two needles, and bring two threads of fine silk, and cut the two needles where you have done as you should perforate; then stretch the abscess in four points above the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave the limb until it can bear, and kill the dead flesh by itself; or take it when it has become thin and can bear, then cure what is necessary, and cut the abscess as we have said; and strain the blood or moisture that you have taken, then cure the limb as it should be, and wash it.
dou chancre	For the fire cautery, instruct
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the workings, when it is in a place where one can remove it, as we have said, is that you purge once the bad from black bile; then make it healthy if it has manifest repletion, then wash the bad out of good blood; then pour your instruments or chancre, and the hair from all parts, and the bone from all parts without leaving anything; and let the blood flow freely, and clean it well with your hand or something, and if the bleeding does not stop, do not make the incision of the artery or vein, if the cauterization is not finished; then treat other wounds until it is healthy.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have already spoken in the division of the similarities of dropsy, and how the assembly of the acute is made, and the signs of each similarity, and the cure that is made by medicines, and that which is cured by iron: if it is only eclipsed; and one should not touch iron in these two similarities: that is to say, tympanites and hypo-archy, for it is a fatal thing; therefore when you treat this similarity of dropsy which is called «eclipsed» by medicines, and the cure does not work, if you look at whether the evil is weak, or if he has another disease besides dropsy, as with all and solution of the belly and similar things; then do not touch iron, for there is doubt; and if you see the evil of great virtue, and he has no other disease but dropsy alone, and he is not too old nor too young, then thus: lean the evil straight up your hands, and press the belly in lifting the acute to the lowest part of the bottom, then take the spatula in this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let there be cutting from two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	And let there be cutting from two parts, at the tip, and no part should be so thin that it can come into contact with the intestines when it is cut, and it cannot be bleached; then look if the dropsy is directed towards the intestines: if it is necessary to cut off three fingers' breadth from the left side of the belly III dois; and if it is for the disease of the liver, then the cut should be on the right side of the belly III dois; and if it is for the mucus, then it should be on the left, and it is not necessary that the hairs grow over the cut so that the superfluous ones do not run to the weakest limb; then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and squeeze, and remove your hand from all the space between the skin and the flesh as in scraping at the quantity of an angle or around; then pierce the flesh until the space comes to the desired length, and this is the length of the scar, then remove it, and if you squeeze this instrument with the form:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it is similar to a thin silver chain, and is of light rain or light chalk, and has in its part outwards small perforations; and on one side, three perforations; and two on the other side, and one on the other; and the patient is cut as with a pen, and this is the form of the incision that the scribes make to write with a pen:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	At the top of the instrument is the needle, so that when the instrument comes to the skin, then immediately above the instrument; without the half or the third part, because if you remove more than it should be in that hour, by chance if the patient dies from the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he grips his hand, or he approaches death; but in accordance with the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the wound signify, and its spirits; then withdraw the instrument and retain the point, and it is retained now for the one who strikes the perforation that is above the syphilitic, of which I have spoken, that you prick according to this manner; then start the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and take a small quantity of the point; do this every day, and guard against following too much until it is only a little blood.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt the pain, and leave it much unattended, the cure of the sepulture or sand chafes, and by much sweating or bathing and in the sun, and becomes tainted from drinking; and the cure of desiccative medicines until they are healthy, and cauterize above the stomach and above the liver and above the spleen after the extraction of the arrow, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the stopping of the staff
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	No child ever born who does not have a hernia in the staff, or the hernia is small, or it is not in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is necessary to pierce at all times very thinly according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	then place or puncture very thinly from the bottom, and bind it and keep it thus for three or four days until it wants to urinate, then remove the bandage and let it urinate, and then put it back; and perhaps it does not work, because the urine that comes out does not leave it closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	If the one who is punctured is small, then treat it with a thin bandage from the bottom, as we have said, and it will expand.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who have not healed the puncture in their joint cannot urinate before they raise their tail; and they cannot defecate because the matter cannot come up to the marrows, and it is a very bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the manner of the work is such that the hairs lie still on their backs, with the head of the knife and the handle like the size of a pen's tip, so that when the wound cuts in the middle, it is as it should; and be careful not to let blood come out many times, and if it does, if the stain is of blood, and treat the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	of the pustules of the knife
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times come blisters on the knife, and it is an ugly appearance of a char; and in it are malign and not malign; so it should be that you prick them at one fine incision, and clean and wipe all, then put on cotton moistened in Egyptian ointment; then treat the ointment until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if it is a malignant ulcer, of putrid color and foul-smelling, then you must apply cauterization.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have scraped it, and if the ulcer is deep within the flesh and has parts inside and outside, then you must first remove the part that is inside; and when it is clean, then treat the part outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you treat them together, if you are not sure that the ulcer has been removed, and it becomes blacker and more corrupt, and there is pus; then you must remove everything that is black and corrupted, then apply the ointment made of honey and flour mixed with grape skins and raisins, then treat with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if blood comes out, then apply the lunar cauterization as follows:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cauteries are helpful in two situations: when blood comes out and during corruption; and if the tail is corrupted and retracted, then you should apply a piece of wet cloth to the tip of the tool, and urinate on the wounds; and when the skin has been removed from the head of the tool that those who have not been circumcised, or it is for a wound or an abscess, then it is necessary to scrape it with the tool's hair until the tissue is detached, and deliver the patient from the tail of the tool in all parts; and if it is a difficult matter to devise this, then you should scrape it with the tip of the tool and the skin, then apply a subtle layer of linen cloth soaked in cold water, so that it does not grow back.
de la circoncision	Of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not of the same kind as other wounds; however, when we perform this work of our own will, and properly in children, it is necessary that we do the best work, and the least harmful to health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not practice circumcision on their children, because they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	Because I have seen the greatest part of the masters and the wise who performed circumcision in the Middle East, and among the forces, and all at once; if it were up to me, it would be two threads, and by chance if one covers the other and delays the other.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or the pain returns quickly, and it is doubled, and the wound dressing that is done so soon is not sure at all; and the wound dressing of the wound may escape the iron, and corrupt the work, and many times they are born in such a way that they have no need of wound dressing and I have seen it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the wound dressing that is done with force to all the length of the thread, I have found the best of the experiment, for the forces cut equally as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you press your hand, it cuts equally in all the length of the thread; but that the thread be well stretched around the skin; and the manner of the first work is that you make the child think, if he listens, that you are only tying the thread around the reed as far as possible, and then throw it into all the ways that you can; then put your hand straight on the reed, and hold the force between your hands or outside your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then close your hand on the reed and blow gently, and pull it up as far as possible until the part of the reed is clean; then wipe the dirt that is gathered, then tie the limb with a double thread, then tie it away from the other end; and hold it between two fingers, and rub between the two threads, then raise the thread quickly and pull out the head of the reed; then let the blood drop slowly and slowly, for that is the most dangerous; and put powder on and on the powder a poultice glued with one egg cooked imperfectly with rose water, confected with red wine and oil, and leave it on the other side, and cure the other cure until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the forces for the application is as follows: the two shoulders should be even and thin, and the shoulders should also be as great as the chest evenly.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of the application is when the blade enters at an angle; therefore, it should be extended to your elbow, as well as the handle, and if you cannot hold it at your elbow, then use a handle and then the handle.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they last for three hours, and what is outside the rod is swollen, let it rest until the abscess is calm, and scrape lightly; and if the handle is as you can move it, and guard from the part of the rod, it will not harm him.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, treat the limb of things that are dirty with wounds of powder, which we have said to treat powders, and if it is cared for too much, it will not harm; therefore, treat it as we have said until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	Retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	Retention of urine is due to the blockage of a stone, or frozen blood, or bowel, or charred meat, or similar things that we have mentioned in the division; and if the urine is not released, and you see that the retention is due to the stone that is high or at the neck of the bladder, it is necessary that the pain be pulled up over his knees; and his feet are placed on his back, and his abdomen is extended from the part above the back, and he is strained as much as possible; and then the neck of the bladder is pressed against the stone above, for which reason the urine is released, and if it does not come, as we have said, and the pain is great, then you must administer extraction with all the instrument that is called «siringue», which is made of fine silver hair, like the pen of an eagle; and its tail is a palm long and half, and it is thin at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And the manner of the issue of urine is such that you take a double thread, and tie the head of the linen or cotton to the pouch, and push the head of the thread into the tube; then fold the excess linen and push it towards the head of the tube, then oil the tube with oil or butter and egg white, and make the patient sit on the seat, and the bladder and the wet cloth of oil and olive oil and vinegar; then place the tube heavily in the cloth, until it reaches the root of the cloth, then double the cloth over towards the top; then push the tube forward just before the bladder, and the patient feels the urine coming out, and it is not made according to this order except for those who are turned or go there; then tie the thread all around the pouch little by little, and the urine follows the linen, then remove it, and correct the urine; and repeat the tube until the bladder is empty and aligned with the patient.
des maladies de la vessie	of diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When pus or blood comes into the bladder, and putrefaction is present, and you see it drip watery and medicinal substances, then use all the instrument called «clepsedre», and it is this form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed, and if it has three openings: two from one side, and one from the other, as you see; and the needles are passed through the place where the medicine courts so that it stops well the urethra without addition, so that one can draw out the moisture, and put when necessary; and when you see your medicines entering the bladder, put the head of the syringe in the moisture, and pull to the drawing which is inside; if you draw the moisture to the syringe, and then strongly push the drawing inside; the moisture will enter inside, and it will come to the bladder now, so that the patient feels it; and this is the form of the subtle catheter with which one catheterizes the bladder: if it is in:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it is of silver or of lead, and it is the highest; and remove it from the side where the veins lie; then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture that you see cluttered in the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts formed by a good quality thread doubled, and heat the moisture over the fire; then pour the head of the poultice into the rod, then hold your hand on the bladder all around the moisture, until the hairs feel that this moisture has come to the bladder; and if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle, and pierce it roundly around; then tie the thread strongly in these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles the bread, and put inside what you see oil and moisture and vinegar, and tie it in the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have said in the division the ways of stone, and extraction together with medicines; and I have said the difference between the stone embedded in rain, and all signs, and in which stone one should open a hole; and in the bladder, and in the rod; and I will tell you clearly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone embedded in the bladder is more common in children, and it is a sign that the sharp jump of the bladder resembles a sharp jump in its subtlety; and there is hair, and great pain in the rod, and it happens many times, and then it returns; and at most of these jumps the foundation; and it is light the healing of children up to they have IV years, and it is very difficult for elders, and it is as constant as those who are between young and old; and it is a lighter cure for those who have a large stone, than for those who have a small one.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the cure, it is first necessary to cleanse the wound with a poultice, to draw out all the filth that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it never hinders one from seeking the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the wound by the feet, and stand up and move it towards the outside, so that the stone descends to the edge of the anus, and does not pass out of the thigh; then place it between your hands prepared, and your hands are away from your thighs, so that the intestines are all descending below; then take and touch it inside; if you feel the stone in the space, then hurry to cut across the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	If she does not bleed at the touch of the finger, if your index finger of your right hand is greased, if the pain is sharp, or if your middle finger is greased, if the pain is dull; and place it on its base, and cut into the stone, and when you feel it at your finger, then moisten the neck of the bladder; then press upwards at your finger, and the stone where you see it was cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend his right hand over the testicles, and his left hand to remove the skin on the side where the incision is made; then cut the spatula, of which this is the shape:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And between what is between the bones and the foundation, not in the middle but on the side of the right navicular bone; and straight up the stone, and your force should be at the foundation or the base, and your cut should be through the middle so that it is wide by lack, and narrow inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large; perhaps the pressure on the force which is at the base, that it would jump out without effort; and if there is a piece of stone with angles and edges: if it is rough to remove; and if there is a piece that is soft, similar to a glass, and rounded, from which the issue is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	When there are angles and margins where it should be cut, make the incision wider; and if it does not fit, it is necessary to strain it with nails that are as thick as a lime at the head, to prevent the stone from escaping; or you can use a subtle hooked instrument at the head; and if you cannot engage it in this way, enlarge the hole slightly, and if there is no bone, then strain it with vinegar; and if there are more than one stone, first remove the largest at the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then remove the smaller ones, and if there are many more, do so afterwards.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, it should be cut larger, and make a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For two things happen to the wound: either it dies, or the urine comes out through the opening that the bones cannot seal; but you must try to pull, or tear with pliers, until you tear it into pieces; and when you have completed your work, apply incense and aloe and dragon's blood to the wound, and bind it, and place a moist cloth soaked in oil and wine, or oil and vinegar and cold rosewater, to soothe the abscess; then replace the wound on its shoulder, and do not remove the bandage until the next day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you reset it, apply moss and vinegar to the dislocated joint, then use a healing ointment and basilicon until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if an abscess comes to the wound and corrosions, and clots of blood in the bladder, and is retained by the urine, which is known as a sort of torture: then apply your remedy to the wound, and extract that clot, for if it remains, it will rot the bladder, and ruin it; then lift the wound with vinegar and salt and silk, and assist in all ways that you can, until it is healed; and it is necessary that all the remedies that you apply, that you tie the two thighs together, and gather the medicines above the wound.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the arrow is small, and it is conveyed with a stick, and tied tightly, and the urine cannot come out; then the cure for this that I have said before, that you should cut many times, is to excuse the cutting for this cure.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have experienced this before.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take an iron rod according to this form and be at three angles tied with one thread:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take a thread and tie the arrow around the rod outside the wound, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then lightly beat the iron rod on the thread until it reaches the arrow; and gradually turn the iron rod in your hand into the arrow until you can pierce the arrow from the other side; if urine comes out immediately, then press your hand over where the remaining part of the arrow is inside the rod.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is already broken, and has jumped with the urine, and is grasped by the hairs; and if you cannot do this for any reason, then tie a thread below the stone and another above, then make the rod in the middle of the stone between the two threads, then pull it out, and release the thread, and clean the clot of blood that is in the wound; and treat until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	of the stone from women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	There is rarely a stone in women, and if it ever happens, the treatment is difficult, and it is forbidden for three reasons: the first is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman well-versed who will expose herself willingly, specifically when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third way is that by chance one cannot find a woman well versed in this art of hands; and the fourth way is that the woman's stone is further forward than the man's, because it is necessary to make a deeper incision, and there is great fear involved. And if necessary, you should summon a skilled midwife, and if you do not have one, do not proceed with the operation; and present a clean blade in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to do what you command for the examination of the stone; and look very carefully if the woman is virgin: therefore, it is necessary to put her on her back and ask for the stone; and if she finds it, she should push it out of her body, and recommend that she push it out or with pain, and press her right hand firmly on the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she finds it, it is necessary to move it from great to great, from the entrance of the anus until it reaches the root of the thigh; then cut across the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the body, where it is most likely to be found, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move her above the stone or below, and let the tailor make a small opening in the belly, if you feel the stone so sharp that the wound cannot be closed until the stone can be removed, and know that there are many kinds of stones: namely, small and large, sharp and smooth, long and round, and those that rain.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	if you know the similarities to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if you do not know, put leprous vinegar on the wound, and keep it there for an hour until the wound is cleansed; then return to your work, until the stone is fully formed, and have the tools that I told you about in the extraction of the stone to help you in your work; and if you do not know, and it is the artery that is cut, put powder on the wound and bandages and ointments, and do not start again, and leave the stone and do not pull it out, for fear that the patient might die; then cure the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is calmed, and the limb has healed, then return to your work, until the stone is fully formed.
de hernie carnouse	of a cancerous hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Water hernia is nothing other than an assembly of moisture or white feces, which is outside the intestines, which contain the urine; and it is called "syfac", and never properly in the tissue of the urine, if one considers that it is another urine; and this is the skin of the intestine between the white feces that we have said; and it does not have a pole.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this branch is due to weakness that comes from the womb, and it is spread out with that matter.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And sometimes it comes from the blows on the womb, and this moisture has many colors: or it is a declining color to yellow, or it is without red, or black, or aqueous white, and there are more; and these are the signs of knowing this assembly, for if it is white and facial as we have said, then it is the abscesses that we have mentioned, not long like an egg, and does not open the womb, because it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if it has moisture in its own egg, then it is the abscesses that we have mentioned with part of an egg, and because one thinks it is another egg; and if the moisture is between the skin of the womb and the white facial as we have said, then it feels good; therefore when you want to know the color of the moisture, try all the surrounding parts, for that is how it was before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes after the introducer, judge what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we treat it with iron, it is necessary to clean the hairs according to as much power and the replenishment of its body; then place it on its back, on something a little high, and cover it with much cloth; then bend over its right side, and command the minister that he bends over the left, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs of the chest; then take the spatula and scrape the skin of the ribs from long to above the knuckle, and let your stroke be straight in dividing the skin of the ribs to the white fat, and scrape the skin subtly according to as much power; then pierce the white plain with a sharp edge from wide to large through the hole, and extract all the sharp, and then put your forceps, and close the white face above; and do not touch the chest except the white face itself; scrape all or in pieces carefully the side of it subtly, if you do not scrape it well enough, it will return to the sharp; and if the wound opens again to your work, then reset it in its place when you have completed the work of the white face; then gather the two flaps of the chest at one seam, then treat it as the other wounds, until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you suspect the broken bone is corrupted by another disease, it is necessary to tie the vessels that are suspended, doubting the evacuation of blood; then cover the wound with a bandage, and extract the bone, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the sharp object is assembled in two parts together, so that it is two branches; then cover the other part as you have done the first evenly, then suck out the blood, and put a poultain of softened bread in rose oil into the wound; and put on top of this another poultain of softened bread in wine and oil, and put on top of the two bandages, and wrap it with doubled cloths, and tie it to the body according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two cloths and place them according to this pattern around the waist of the pants, and one on the back of the patient's hips, and the other at the side of the buttocks; and the other two at the two angles, and all together are held in a loop of the belt; and never is this part of the cautery treated with iron needle, and it is that you take one cauterizing needle, and cover the skin of the wounds, and if heated as we have said, so that the white sap that contains the poison is discovered; then take the cauterizing tool in this form, and pierce that sap with a thin needle, and the skin with this subtle cauterizing tool is burned:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And use every method you can, until you have removed everything; and guard that the blade does not touch the bone; and cleanse this work so it is safer; and be careful of blood clots, and be careful of the work of cutting; and if nothing goes against you, or abscess or blood clots or other thing, then cure what goes against you, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the pain is not severe, and does not want to tolerate this work due to its horror, then use perforation, as I have told you, and it is that when you are certain by the signs that we have said that the sharp instrument is laid, then place the pain on the raised seat; then perforate the abscess at the part distant from everything wide, and put the perforation through the length of the body; and let the wounds be wide so that all the sharp edge is gone; then put cotton on the limb, and bind it, and leave for the remaining sharp to come out, then cure until the wound is healed; and if the white cloth does not let the sharp come out of the wound mouth, then it is necessary that you go with a pen or the instrument used to treat the sharp in hydropikes, of which the form is as before; and enlarge the wound a little, and let the sharp return, and be assembled after six months or around, and when it is assembled as before, and thus the pain will pass its days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of abscesses of the groin
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	There are many different situations in this section of this branch that seem to me to be worth leaving, and I will tell you the work and similar things about the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	Therefore, many abscesses come from wounds and immediately to the groin; and this is by many cases.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	It is to know by excessive sharp and cold, which is spread in the groin, or from impact; and the color of the abscess is like the color of the blood; and it does not have any pain, and it is a painful abscess; and perhaps it is some gray and putrid abscesses, and of yellowish color, and sometimes comes from a wound of an artery, or from an inflamed vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is due to an artery, it is known by the appearance of an abscess, when you press it with your fingers; and it should not be touched.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	Those who are made of opening a vein are known by their appearance at the touch of your fingers, and can often make the incision above this resemblance, and on other parts; and it is that you should cover the wound with the corresponding part, then place the end in the top, and the thread from the white silk face, and deliver the suspended part from all parts of the wound.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the wound is already healed with these charges, then it should be incised, and covered; and if it is in the face, or inside the vessels, then it should be delivered entirely, and covered roundly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the head of the shoulder is born behind the back, it is necessary that you cover it entirely, and straighten the neck, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is completed, apply the wound with a soft cloth soaked in rose oil and wine, then perform other treatments until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the groin
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapping resembling a bandage, with the softening of the groin, and the patient cries out in pain when moving; and the treatment of this disease is as difficult and dangerous as the previous one, and we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	It is necessary to make the dislocated joint sit on the seat of the shoulder, then lift the suspensory ligament of the ribs to your fingers, and all the tendons that are close to the thigh, and tie the master muscles, and extend them evenly; then cut with a sharp knife across the tendon in the middle, as far as they are exposed, and then scrape each part, as we have said in the extraction of arteries which are in the temples; then take an needle or double thread, and tie it to the first bone where the blood came from, and tie it to the other end; then suture in the middle correctly, according to the length of the body, and draw out the corrupted blood; then treat the wound as with others or when one is bled, so that no vein is cut that belongs to the ribs; for by this there is no harm, and if all the veins come out of sight, it is necessary to remove the ribs from all the veins; so that the bone does not lose its nourishment due to the incision of the veins, and dry up and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	of the toothache
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The causes of this branch are from the section that comes out or the extension over the belly in the part of the ankles, because the intestines descend from that toothache to one of the joints; and this toothache is either from the section of it, or from its extension, and these two methods of many causes come: from the shock, or the jump, or the shout, or the lifting of heavy weight, and similar things; and the signs when it comes to the extension of the toothache, it is that it is painful and painful in a long tension, and does not come suddenly; and it is the abscesses equal up to the front, because the toothache approaches the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it comes to the section of the appendix, which brings on sudden pain at the beginning, and has various abscess appearances outside the skin, and is for the outcome of the intestine and the body due to the appendix.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the bowels are not sent with the intestine, and they are retained inside, and cause great pain to suffer in the patient, especially when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these cases of fear of iron, because it is necessary to avoid them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And the way of the work is that you command or make the patient roll up the intestine with his hand inside the wound, if it can be inserted; then place the head above between your hands, and relieve the ribs; then the chest is held above, and cover all the skin of the belly; then put one finger in the liver according to what you have skill for opening the wound, so that the two fingers can come out; then scrape the appendix that is outside the skin of the belly, as much as the white appendix does not appear white on all sides; then put your index finger in the direction of the liver, between the white appendix that is outside the skin of the belly and between the second appendix, and behind the belly, and between the second appendix; and move gently to the right side of the belly inside the skin of the belly, and hold the white appendix in your left hand high, and relieve the belly against the white appendix; and command the minister to extend the belly upwards, and remove what is behind the linen; and if you find anything, bring it out of the stomach; then take a needle or a thread made of twelve threads, and put it in the back part of the appendix, which is after the skin of the belly; then cover the threads that appear from the threads, as much as there are four threads; then assemble them one above the other in the shape of a cross, and tie the appendix, which we have said is outside the skin of the belly, with a strong thread of two inches; then cover the threads with the thread, and form it into two inches, so that none of the vessels that are needed cannot enter the wound, that no pus gathers; and finally tie the thread according to the first thread, and after these two threads leave the appendix which is outside the skin of the belly, the length of one finger; and then the other according to the roundness that the belly has; then cover the part that is outside the skin of the belly, as we have said before; then apply moistened linen in oil, and put it on the wounds, and also apply the thread that we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And never cauterize the white swelling that we have mentioned, after the incision, due to doubt of blood clotting.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this often happens, and let the wound remain until it stops bleeding; and if it takes too long to stop, then soak in hot vinegar, and apply what we have said, until it stops; then treat the wound with other treatments, until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia carbuncle
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch, I have never seen anyone dare to perform the cure by iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients said that it is made as the branch that is together with the viscera, in a manner that you tie the veins, after the incision slightly above; then apply oil, and treat the abscess with what works, until the veins heal; and the treatment is as we have said, until it is perfectly healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Never comes a tear or breakage in the same way as we have said, and it opens wide; and no one should cut into the intestines at this point, and if they do, it is little, and it should be repaired every hour; and if it remains too long at this point, then the wound or abscess believes that the intestine is cut; and this happens by the extension of the syphac that is at the tear, as we have said, because it is stretched, then it is softened and inflated the belly and opens; and the cure is by cauterization, as we have previously said; and it is never cured in this way: and it is that the wounds are closed with a large needle between your hands, then cover the tear with the belly of the intestine enlarged according to the quantity of three fingers; and then remove the syphac that is outside the skin that covers it, then take the thread and put it on the belly of the syphac; and press against the front of the belly, then cut the two bellies of the syphac above the head of the thread, and both; then remove the head of the thread, and do not cover the syphac or extend the flap or other thing, as I have told you in the cure of the intestines; then cure by the treatment of wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the sinews, remove the pus and heal the wound, until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The wound is contracted, and does not appear to be breaking, and the cauterization is quiet in this place, and closer to healing.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the leather of the boots
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the leather of the boots is softened in some men, because the charcoal inside is softened, and it is easy to see; and when one wants to cure it, it is necessary to make the patient lie on their back, and cut the softened leather over the natural leather; then assemble the two pieces of leather at a seam, and if you see, cut the excess softened leather into three or four seams firmly; then sew between the seams, and treat the wound as with other wounds, until it is healed, and cut the thread.
dou chastrement	forcibly
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	It is not customary to speak of chastisement in our law, and for this reason I do not wish to speak of it in this book; and it is necessary only in two ways: one is that the patient respond to chastisement when asked, and be treated with chastisement; and the other is because we often have to chastise some animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and rabbits and others.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say therefore that chastisement is done in two ways: either by pulling or by cutting.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In the one that we do by pulling, we make our seat near the animal in high heat, until the sinews are softened and remain so; then take them in your hand, until they are returned and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	1. For the hip dislocation: it is necessary that you tame the beast, and press the skin of the thighs with your right hand, then tie the suspensory ligament, and scrape each bone to the cop, when you have well burned them; and leave no trace of the sharp or subtle spicule that is on the bones; and this method of taming is better than that which is done by attraction, for the attraction may leave something of the thighs, by which the beast desires luxury; then cure the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	1. Of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermaphrodite exists in two ways among men: one is that between the two testicles open as wide as the natural shape of a woman, or it has hair, and sometimes it secretes urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other way is in women, and has a penis like a finger and two testicles.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the treatment of men and women is that you cut off all the hairs stuck together, and treat them as other wounds; in the second way, of men whose urine sprays through the skin of the testicles, there is no treatment.
de la tentigene	of the tenting
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	For the tenting is a charred pole placed above the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see; and some women have also used it as much as a hand, and that is the cure.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is necessary to apply the superfluity of the tenting to your hand or nails, and clean it lightly; and do not alter too much, as blood does not come out, then the cure of other cures until it is healed; and to another char that is born at the mouth of the marsh, and use it, and perhaps it will jump up, and it is according to the appearance of a snake, and for this they called the old «snake disease».
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If it is necessary to cup, as we have said of the technique, and treat until it is healed.
de erratique	of error
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	Erratique is when the nature of the woman is not well perceived, or the uterus is small; and it is nature by birth, or accident by disease that has come to be; or it is due to a charm, or a subtle or sharp spice, and it is made in the marrow, or in the costal, or out of place, or whatever; and it prevents conception, and pregnancy, and perhaps the flowers to have; and the knowledge of this is by the look of the belly.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the swelling appears nearby, then it is yours or the right one.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is a subtle swelling, and it is near the two lips, then quickly do this: place your two index fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread; then press the two lips together firmly, until the subtle swelling is pressed out, and it is over the swelling; then take linen, and dip it in oil, and place it on the limb, and massage the woman every day, so that she cannot move.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the swelling is hard and rough, then it is necessary to use a cupping vessel similar to a leaf of myrtle.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the bone is broken, if it is bent and straightened; and have the medicines stanching blood, such as acacia, blood of dragon, incense, abundant amount of oil; then apply a large piece of dry plaster, so that the wound cannot stick together; and thus let it be long, and then apply a tent of dry linen; then treat other treatments until it is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when in the marsh there is a broken bone, if it is necessary to cover it this way, unless it is an abscess.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For the abscess that is in the marsh, one should not touch it with fire.
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that do not usually heal, and when the hemorrhoids are old they become thrombosed; and we have said in the division the similarities of those, and the signs, and I will say here those that require treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I said that hemorrhoids and thrombosed ones, when they are in the marsh, and do not appear until felt, cannot be treated except by iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those that are at the edge of the marsh, which can be felt, are those that can be treated.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	Therefore, it is necessary to put the woman in a cold house, then apply leeches and cut off the thrombus at its roots, then powder with restraining medicines such as acacia and sulfur and incense, and similar things; then bathe her feet for an hour in cold water, then put her in a cold bath; if blood comes out, sit her in a decoction of sumac and scrape peels of green pomegranates and galls and similar things, and then take wheat flour, mix it with honey and oil, and make an ointment on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if he endures, it is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If not, apply suction cups to the back and breasts with force; then take the limb, and soak it in plantain juice or agrimony juice with old wine, and apply heat to the limb.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess is ready to burst, treat the limb with poultices until it is healed; and the one called "albathir" is red, and resembles a sharp, rough chief, if it needs covering as I have said of the thulium; and then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	of boils from the marsh
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many types of boils come from the marsh, such as chancre and pustular abscess and herpes and styes and fistulas and hemorrhoids and chronic abscess, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the section.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	Therefore, I must mention in this treatment the chronic abscess that comes from the marsh, which is not one of the boils that coalesce; and if you know how to use iron, look at whether the abscess is aggravated at the beginning of its appearance, and if it is accompanied by fever and heat, and if it turns red.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Therefore do not rush to pierce it, but let the pain subside; then place the injured part on a chair, and have two small stools where it can lean, and support it on its back, and bring its feet to the sides of the leg; and let its knees be spread, and put its arms away from its hips, and tie them tightly with a good bandage; then apply the splint to the right side of the chest, and maintain the instrument that opens the mouth of the wound, from which afterwards comes the shape; and when you see the instrument maintained, it is necessary to check the depth of the wound, so that what enters into the instrument does not go further than it should, and does not break the injured part; and if the instrument is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the wound with cloths, so that the instrument does not hurt it; and it is necessary to put the horn of the instrument on top, and sterilize the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	When the abscess is open and one makes it with their hand wide, if it needs to be covered at the head, cover it with spatula leeches; and when the wound is empty, put moistened tents in rose or green oil; and place the tent from the wound to the edge of the marsh, and place above the marsh and above the other clean moistened bandage in hot water or boiled herbs; then after two hours of poulticing, as long as it is healed; and never lift the marsh and the wound with a cloth of hot water and honey, and then with hot water or roots of lily and aristolochia are boiled; then reapply poulticing.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is set in the marsh, it is necessary that you guard against cooking iron, but treat it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	Midwifery is first in the bath that she knows the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs as you see the woman approaching, and desires to smell the armpit: then hasten the child to issue; then wash that child according to the natural figure, and is its own head, and the second with him; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to press gently on his belly, so that the child issues soon; for as soon as he issues from his head, the second is with him, and is washed in the marsh of its superfluities by good cleansing; and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it never comes above its feet, and comes forcefully to the chest or the neck, and the hands, or it comes over its belly, or sometimes, and is turned by chance upon its back, and by other bad figures; therefore it is necessary for the bailiff to be wise and subtle in these things, and if he errs and is deceived, I will show you all the figures as you should help him.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes out by natural issue, and the mother gives birth with great pain, and her strength is weak, then let her sit on a seat, or the women hold her; and rub oil or fenugreek that has been cooked onto her back, and then give the bailiff a small spatula of this form:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	And pierce the second joint, and cover it with a bandage until the moisture that is inside has been removed; and take the woman's belly so that the fetus descends, and if it does not, then you must clisterize the woman with a muskillaige of fenugrec with oil of seisament; then let her swallow it and vomit it out, and keep her mouth and nose closed for an hour: then the fetus will now descend.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if both hands are dislocated, then you must gently and gradually reset them; and if they cannot enter, then place the woman on a chair, and raise her feet up high; then lift the chair over the ground, and tie the woman, so that she does not fall during the lifting; and if the hands cannot enter, and the child is dead, then cover the hands with a cloth that was previously placed at the crotch, and extract the child, and reset it equally.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	from the birth of the child above its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes above its feet, it is necessary to place it on its back; then turn it slowly and slowly, until it is level; then grasp both feet and extend them slowly and slowly.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If it jumps just as it is born, command it to hold still, and extend its neck; if it does not, may God will it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it is not as we have said, then turn it slowly and slowly, until it is in its natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	Then it is completely straight.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if it does not come out as we have said, take a handful of altee, and oil of sisament, and melted gum, and grind everything in the mortar; and put on the natural form of the woman inside and outside of this ointment, then make her sit in high temperature until above the ribs; and when she is softened, make her a mustard plaster, and put it on, and leave it for an hour; then make her sit on the seat, then make her spit and hold her mouth and nose, and lightly press her belly, for the child is now born.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	from the birth of the child over its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this form, one puts their hands gently and gently on its knees; then it should be laid on its back, and its feet hanging down, and lying on the bed; and gently folds its hands gently and gently, and then takes its hands on its stomach, and removes its clothing little by little until it is clean from below; and if the child does not cry, one takes its feet and forms them gently, then moves its stomach upwards, then one blows on its stomach; and slowly feeds the child a little and a little; and commands the woman to hold it until the child is born.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the issue of the child who comes out widely with a hand extended
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	It is necessary to bring back the hand: if it cannot be brought back, lift the woman and go; if she cannot go, place her on a bed, and straighten her legs; then relieve the muscle that I have mentioned; and if she does not give birth, sit her on a chair, then study how to bring back the hand; and hold the child according to its natural shape, and make it sneeze, and command her to bear down until the child is born.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	of the issue of the child on its neck, and it has spread its hands, and its face turned towards the back of its mother's
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	It is necessary that the patient wash his hand, then turn it slowly and gently; when it is even, put on the natural oil of olive, as we have said, then command him to move it slowly; when you have done this, make him sit on a chair, and command him to grasp something; and make him spit.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In the same way, for all the other fingers.
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it comes to doing this with all the other fingers, if the moisture is removed by gently pressing the finger against your nail and against its neck, and holding the face down, so that it is not retained, and the child dies; then give the child inside, until you have put it in the right place, and command the woman to grasp something once: then it becomes loose.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the issue of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	It is often the case that twins are born, and sometimes they are born three or four at a time; and this is not an uncommon thing, and it happens often.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	It is strange that they do not live, if not named; I know that they are multiplied and are saved by the midwife who delivers them, who is tied to the bed; and sometimes they are born naturally as one at a time, just like we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they are born harshly, as we have said the care should be, and if the afterbirth is subtle, and she does what she should do quickly and lightly, and she does it in such a way that it is good for her health.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	They are never formed in the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, or seventh month, or more than fifteen months old, and they are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of the wise doctor, and it is necessary that the bale sage knows everything, because perhaps similar things happen to them; so do according to what is necessary.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When treating the woman of the dead child or womb, as I have said in the division, and if there is no result, and you are forced to handwork; it is necessary that you know whether the woman is of sound virtue and has no accident or fear of death; then the woman should be laid on her back, and her arms bent downwards, and her legs raised; and the assistant holds two fingers in the child's mouth, or she is tied to the bed if she is not treated by the removal of the child; then wipe the mouth of the child with mustard powder and fenugreek seed and linseed, then put the midwife's hands in these oils and powders; then gently feed the child with them, then give her a little warm water or milk that is suitable for her, and if the child is dressed with clothes that are not suitable for him, and if he has a fever, put the tube in his eyes or on his neck or in his mouth or in his palate or behind his beard or in his ears or on his ribs, and if he spits it out, put it in any of these places that we have said, until the thing is empty; and this is the form of the tube:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then place it against another bone, or where you have skill, so that the extraction is even; and then set it evenly by moving one part and another, to make it move, and hold the bones together, as is the form:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if a part remains, then use some of his two fingers' oil, and put it in that part, and pull the other part; and if it does not remain, then place this bone or higher up on the shoulder, and do this as much as it comes out completely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be brought back by tightening, then you must wrap it up above the injury, until it is completely out; then cover it in the joint of the foot or at the knee, and so you must do in the other hand, and in both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	If the patient is a child and is large and has a sharp angle at the end, it is necessary to use a spatula with spinous processes between your fingers, and straighten the angle; or you can break it with an instrument called "almidach", of which the form comes with the tools or chapter that follows this one; and in the same way, if the child has a great natural sharp angle; and then remove the bones with pliers, and if the patient's stomach is swollen and out of place, if it cannot be put back, cut it open; and if it is inflated in the abdomen or outside the ribs, it is necessary to pierce it until the moisture comes out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the arrow is above its feet, it is a light attraction, and the wound to the mouth of the wound is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	If it is sharp in the belly or in the groin, it is recommended that you extract it with a rolled-up cloth over your hand; and when the belly or groin is opened, as long as the wounds are clean; and if other members are also injured, and the patient remains conscious, then put your hand under their chin, and pull out the arrow from the mouth of the wound; then use one or two fingers, and pull it out; and if the mouth of the wound is retracted due to an abscess that has formed, do not force it, but manage moist and greasy things; and apply emollient poultices, and sieve in high mollifying and moistening substances.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the shoulder is dislocated above its socket, and you can put it back in place, follow what we have said about the living child; and if there is no way to do so, then treat it as you would with a fracture, and leave nothing of the second part.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, follow what we have said about abscesses that come in the marsh; and if blood comes out, it should be stopped with high pressure, and then treat it with other remedies.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	I saw a woman in whose womb an infant had died, then consulted another about the other, and the other died also.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, some abscesses appeared in the buttocks, and they swelled so much that they burst, and then began to cause great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I went to the doctor, and he thought for a long time, but could not close the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied strong adhesive bandages, and some bones were stuck in them, and after some time others came out.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was very surprised because the belly does not have any bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I looked at the wound and found many bones in it, until the woman was much better; and the woman thought for a long time like this, and there was a little blood on her skin; and I do not remember that chapter except that when the masters find an unusual thing, they know how to use help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	bring the marsh to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	then comes the form of pressure, with which we open the books; and to II returns to II questions about II joints.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	Indeed, the corners should be more subtle than the restrictive, and be made of smooth or boxwood; and the mouth of the fust should be two inches wide, and the margin of the trees should be one palm and a half; and between the two limbs should be two stoppers of this same wood, which are firmly fastened on both sides, half a palm or more in length; and these two stoppers are inserted into the mouth of the marsh when returning the two corners.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, which appears more subtle and lighter, should be made of an even or boxwood rod, according to the appearance of needles; and it has two prongs, as you see, one palm long and two fingers wide; and when you want to open the wound with the instrument, place the woman on the bed, the feet together and the legs spread, then drive the two prongs into the wound, and hold the head of the instrument between her teeth; then work your hand with the instrument equally, as you would with needles, according to the amount that you want to open the mouth of the wound, until the bone does what it wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	This tool is surrounded by many similar ones; and when the patient has them all prepared, the more they have, the faster the work, and higher the praise for their skill.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not disregard the tool that you have not prepared, for their need is not excuseable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the second joint is held in infancy, it is necessary to command the patient to hold their tongue, and then make them spit out the condition, and hold their hands at the mouth and nose; and if they vomit, well done.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If not, take the pot, and make a syrup or covering, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the marsh, such as rue, anise, chamomile, cassia, and centaury; all these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked or boiled over the fire; then put a spoonful of syrup or covering in the mouth of the marsh, and the tongue until the vapors come into the mouth; then make them spit out, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second joint moves.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if it remains after this treatment and is not much better, then command the patient to massage their right hand with olive oil or musk oil of altee, and then put it in its natural position, and find the second joint; and when they have found it, grasp it and stretch it gently and straight, so that the married does not prevent extraction; but move it lightly to the right and left, and then pull; it will come out and be dislocated.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the married's mouth is very tightly closed, we have said the cure of expectoration and fumigation of herbs; and if none of these things are possible, then guard that you do not force it; but it is better that what is at the mouth of the married, that you tie it to the neck of the woman, then syringe with tetrafarmaçon ointment; if it will take and return, and come out stronger; but nevertheless, when it does so, there comes a bad smell to the stomach and head, and increases the pain.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	If it is therefore necessary to use incantations for the air, none of the ancients have experienced fumigation with cresses and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument used to fumigate the woman during retention of flowers and the secondine is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it is of glass similar to a cage, and one places the head subtly in its nature, and the others wide over the fire; and let the fumigations over the coals, and the tine until it is consumed, and start another.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born who have not yet pierced the foundation, but it has been stupefied by some subtle swelling: therefore it is necessary for the midwife to pierce that swelling at its proper place, and not to pierce the space of the afterbirth, and to cover the wound so that she does not touch it; then place a moistened cloth with wine and oil on it, then treat the wound until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	If you doubt that it will not set, put or insert a splint, and let it lie for some time, and it should be supported as the infant wants to go into the rooms.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And never once comes this stench of pus or abscess; if it covers the wound: if it is treated, as we have said of the splint.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the deep fistula
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that come from below the foundation are nodular and thicker than those that come above the foundation or in the space between the two parts, if there is one fistula or more; and when that nodulation is old, it works, and becomes moist with white or subtle discharge, and never once are these fistulas permanent; and they are known by the fact that there is egestion or ventosity when the pain makes egestion, and perhaps some verses.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that perforate the bladder, and perforate half of the penis; and they reach the joint of the hip, and perforate the knee.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus one knows the fistula passing through the basement, and not passing: and it is that you prick your finger or basement, and put a thin needle of silver or iron into the fistula when there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if it has twisting, if you put a thin tent of lead, or horsehair, until you feel the tent or hair at your finger; and if you do not feel it, and there is no puncturing egestion or ventosity or ver, as we have said: cut so that it does not perforate more; then hurry to cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is located near the bladder or near a urinary duct, if it allows urine to pass, and cannot be cured by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is perforated near the joint of the hip, then the tendon is close to the bone; if there is no tortuosity and the pain is within, then it is stuck, and there is no cure by medicine or cauterization; and in these persistent fistulas, there is no cure except labor and the vanity of those who meddle with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In the one that is not persistent and not ancient, with hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the pain is hidden between your hands on its back; and the legs are raised up to its knees, and its knees are bent towards its belly; then drive a spike, or a thick one if there is tortuosity, until you pierce the tent.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the pain is felt around the base, then you should insert your finger through the opening, feeling for the arrowhead; and if you sense between your fingers the shaft or the point, then remove it; if not, there is no need to struggle, as it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	It is possible to heal some, but this rarely happens; and the aid that is given, if it is to heat the cauterizing iron according to the width of the fistula, as it was previously mentioned; and to push it all the way into the fistula, until it reaches beyond the base; and do this twice or three times, until you know that these charred pieces are removed, which are similar to a barbed arrowhead; then apply the healing of powdered burre, as long as those charred pieces are not released, then apply the cure of ointment, applying char and sealing.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If they are thus healthy, it is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If not, nothing else can be healthy; and if it tries to escape between, and does not perforate just where it is based, and between the attempt and the tent a thick covering of char or syfac, and you see the fistula leading to the cure that follows the covering; if the cope of the beginning of the fistula, and before the tent, and then the cauterize after, until it comes to the top of the tent; and he will be delivered from the attempt, and closed; then wash those charged that seem like a quill of a goose, and none remain.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if you cannot move it, and cut between you and the work, then cauterize with fire or medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For the fire cauterization assembles two things: to know, the burning of these charred pieces, and the stopping of blood and the sealing of moisture; then cure the tents milled in butter or in crushed herbs, as long as the wounds do not weep, and when the chars are burned in the wound; then cure the wound with hard char, and these medicines are dry.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if the fistula comes from just above the foundation, and is away from the body, press on the top or foundation, and inquire there.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the tent, and between them is the cloth or the thread or the charcoal where it is about to pierce, unless there are other means of support and hope, by administering one of the three methods: whether you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut just above the foundation, or if you can put tents and cure as in the first; and do not leave too soon from the front, so that you do not cover the foundation that holds the base, and bring the excretions out through the opening; then cure it as we have said; perhaps it will be healed, or you remove that covering and wipe it clean after it is cut below the foundation, or by tent or other appointed instrument; then clean the charred part of the wound as much as you can; then study to restore the wound and to hold back the fistula in the part before the foundation: if there is a lighter thing to the pain.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And sometimes fistulas are made in this way: and when you insert the probe into the fistula, it is where it costs at the base of the skin above the flesh, then take a probe pierced at the tip in this form:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And you push the thread through and push the probe along the entire thread into the fistula until it is at the top.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is not found in the margin of the base inside, then push out the thread from that one, so that you push your other or base; and pull the top of the thread, and gather the two parts together, and hold them against each other, and let the thread rest for a while until the thread covers those that are between the two, and heal; then cure the wound until it is healed and healthy.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not perforate, then I will puncture it in all possible ways that you can, if it is not too far gone.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it does not matter to make the bandage overly tight if it is too far gone, and then treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The shape of the spiculated bony structure that is made into a fistula is very sharp and pointed on one side, and on the other part not, because we do not know what we should not touch, as you see here:
des emorroydes	des emorroydes
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Emorrydes are in two ways: either they are inside the foundation, like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and some have blood, and others have a little or a lot of pus, and some have a lot of pus, and some have a little or a lot of yellow or red pus, and some have a lot of pus, and the treatment for those inside the foundation is that you order the patient to sweat until they are dry in another room, as long as the foundation is not wet, and then you can tie them with needles, or hold them with your fingers, then cut them at their roots; and if the threads cannot be held by their moisture, take them with a cloth, or cotton, or a piece of cloth; and pull them to both sides, then cut them, and powder over any hot powders that are in the cautery; or cauterize them as it is said in the chapter on cautery, so treat them with other treatments until they are healed; and if the foundation cannot come out, then cleanse the wound with a rough and sharp cleansing agent to remove what is inside the foundation, so that it can come out openly; and if the threads are thick, and the foundation is strong, the treatment is light; and it is that you pinch them with your fingers or needles, then cut them, and treat them as we have said, until they are healed, and do not fear the incision with a knife.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary to stitch the wound in this way: take a thread of twisted wool, and pull it into a needle, and then pull the thread upwards and pierce the needle from the other side, and return the two ends of the thread outside the needle, and if it is wide; then tighten the thread properly, then loosen the thread, and remove the needle, and do the same with all the others, and leave one to let the excess blood out; then put above the wound a piece of linen cloth soaked in rose oil or cerote, and put it above the wound, and instruct the patient to rest; then let him rest until they heal, and when they are healed, then treat them with ointment and other treatment until they are healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	dryly and firmly at the base
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	often occurs dryly and firmly at the base of the intestines, and due to constriction of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary to reset at the point of a sharp tool or your own nail, which does not allow moisture; then care for it as it should be until it is healed; and if it cannot heal, repeat the scraping stronger than before, until it is sound, and let it be scarred; then care for it until it is healed.
dou fremit	dryly trembles
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Mice is a small appearance made on the chest, and it goes very far; and sometimes it finds the lungs, and one feels it like a shiver of cold, and it spreads throughout the body, and more so in the hands than in other parts.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the cure is that you take a quill from a goose or a pen of vulture very strong, and place that quill over the shiver, until the circle around the shiver encircles it completely; then turn your hand to all the quill until you cover all around the shiver, and push it forward, and extract the shiver from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see that the shiver is of a quill made of rain or iron in this form, and is thinly drawn out below and raised above:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	Do not mistake, to hold the first joint, and to press it; and if you see, then cauterize the heat, as it is before or in the chapter of the cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the cautery
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	No one has ever made a cautery of silver or of iron, whether melted or in the form of a needle; and no one has ever made any of these small and large instruments, according to those which they are accustomed to use.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Therefore, those which one should use in the treatment of children and those who are weak and in pain, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the small and large cautery is above wide, or the belly is tied according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And if there is a dislocation where the belly is tied, as you see, and the wound is in one side II holes, and in the other I; and the belly is filled with medicines from a beast's bladder or parchment, and it is perforated all around with small holes, and there is between each hole I inch of space, then sew together the edges with strong thread in X or around, and gather the belly as if it were a goat; and when the medicine is inside, if the wound is facing an instrument before a strong thread, then cicatrize; and this is the form of a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And the medicine should not be too hot or too cold, and oil or similar ointment applied to the head of the cast, then gently press it; then the attendant should apply the ministers to both hands together, until all the viscous parts are removed, then remove the cast, and relieve the pain in his legs at once, and if the medicine wants to come out, let it come out as much as possible; and if he sleeps a whole night, it is a greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cast him with the disease of uterine prolapse, and the medicine wants to come out, let it come out as much as possible; and if he recovers healthily, continue until he is completely healed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	If they are embedded in the base or an abscess, then the poultice should be as thin as for a child; and this is the form of the thin poultice above where the skin is stretched:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already mentioned the treatment of wounds in the division; now we will tell you about the treatments for hands and medicines, according to completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are different according to how they are made, and according to the places or wounds that are made, and of what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things by which wounds are made are by piercing with a spear, and cutting of sword or dagger, or lance or staff or arrow, or similar things; or that are made according to the places of the body, such as a wound that bleeds above the neck, or above the head, or the foot, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members; and I will tell you the treatment of each wound, and I will begin with simple wounds of the head, because the remembrance will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	When a simple wound comes or the bone is not broken, take care if it is an arrow or similar things, and the skin is completely torn and is large, and you doubt lightly of abscess: if you do this immediately clean the head itself if there is little blood from the wound, and clean the opposite part if necessary; and avoid the evils of overeating and heavy food.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he does not want to clean, let him eat soft food, and do not drink wine, and do not change his bed; and put on the wound, if abscess comes, cotton moistened in rose oil only, or in stinging vinegar; and if there is no abscess, put on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not moved by air, powder, which I will say a little later; and if the wound has moved, put on some ointments, as long as it is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large, like that of a tailor's awl and similar, and the lips cannot come together due to tension, then sew them together, as I will say in wounds of the belly, from the seam.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is exposed to the bone, and can be moved but only held by a small piece, then cover it with a hard char in place of skin, and command the patient to eat soft foods, such as testicles and cooked grain, like chicken, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you have to remove skin or flesh, and there is no bone, then cover the whole wound with charcoal, and pour in honey, then treat it; and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, without cutting, and it cannot be stanched by medicines, then tie the artery, and if you have to remove it, then tie it with a thread; and if this does not help, then cauterize.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and you should apply this powder that soothes as soon as the pain begins.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the manner of the powder is as follows: take a part of incense; dragon's blood two parts; fresh chalk three parts, and grind the powder finely, and apply it to the wound, and bind it tightly until it heals well and joins with all its own scabs; then tie it securely, and leave it undisturbed unless it swells; for one should not remove the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And one should never use chalk alone when one does not have incense or dragon's blood, but only when the pain begins.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound has moved, immediately apply this powder; but use some ointments digested, or arrowroot flour made of honey and water, as long as it is not healed; then treat with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if a broken bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with fine needles; and I will tell you about the main fractures later.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and the main fractures, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is a bone, there is no other remedy than to let the care, and not put anything restricting, for it hurts bones and makes them recede; and do not put anything sharp over the wound, for the substance of bones is cold, and the continuation of such things is with the brain, which is one of the highest members; but rather let the medicine be soft, like chalk washed in warm sweet water, and mixed with rose oil, and the cloth washed in warm sweet water, and other stones of this manner, and moist cloths.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then bind it with strips of cloth until it is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	If the wounds are deep and the hair is long and full of blood, pierce or go below the skin; if the artery is cut, and blood flows, stop it, and bind it, and cauterize it if necessary; and if the spine of the neck is cut, or the veins, and the conductor is kept, by which the meat goes, if the horn goes over the canal of the neck, and do not touch the neck but put it back according to its natural shape; then gradually tighten, and leave it for some time, then cure dressings until they are healed; and if the wound has made an impression in the bone, remove it; and if there are pieces of bone, take them all out if you can, and those that you cannot, leave them until the wound has healed and is aligned; and if the wound is fresh, powder over the powder that I have said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	If there is bone in the wound and there is a fistula, then follow the treatment as I have described in his chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound of spear or of dagger
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a spear or dagger wound, and the wound is deep, look to see if there are hairs growing from the wound: cut them off as the pain is mortal; but if it is not deep, and it is fresh and full of blood, do not put powder in the first hour for the blood so that it does not harden immediately, and return to the heart, and cover the pain; but use attractive ointment, and bind it twice a day; and if you have no ointment, put old cotton in the wound to draw out the moisture, and let it rest for three hours, or four, or more; then there will be no spasm, nor will there be tremor of the heart from any other cause; and when you see good conditions, cut off the wound.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Cure the wounds and other treatments, until they are healed; and if they cannot be healed and worked, then there is a fistula; then treat as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from an arrow or sword cut, and it is simple, or small, or at the back, then treat as one should in front; if it is large, then stitching; and if it is small, then powder, and if it has entered into bone, and has broken off pieces, then put them in the wound, and take out the foreign bodies if they are not decayed; and if they are not decayed, then leave the wound to heal, it will alleviate the extraction; and for other wounds on other limbs is judgment as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	belly rupture
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	Belly rupture is great and medium and small; from the large wound sometimes the intestines or the nerves of the intestines escape, by which the insertion of them; and the suture is more painful, and sometimes the small wound is worse than the large one, because one can put the intestines back in, if one does not put them back in exactly; because the intestines swell quickly when they feel the heat, if they are put back in more carefully, and therefore the medium-sized wound is worse, because one must suture the intestines to their place as with other II And there are four ways of rupturing the belly: the two common sutures are in the belly suture, and the suture of other body wounds and two other specific sutures are common to other wounds; and therefore they are more specific with the belly suture, and I will say one by one and explain.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	When the wound is small, and nothing of the internal parts is injured, and it is a matter of putting back together, this is done in one of two ways: either by the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the internal parts are inflamed from the heat.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is hot, heat the parts in this manner: moisten a sponge or a handful of dry herbs in cold water only, or cook them in boiling water with cipol and spike, and heat the internal parts until the inflammation is removed; and never do this without restraint, and it is necessary that one does not burn because of the inflammation.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling departing, if the intestines are moist or high and misshapen, because by this they align quickly; and if it cannot enter, make a small incision in the instrument used to remove worms; and the first cure is to quiet the pain, for we should not cut without great necessity. And this is the instrument for cutting: it is cut from within the abdomen and from outside, and it forms the shape.
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines have jumped out, if you can put them back in their natural form in their own place, for this is best.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is wide, and it is in the part away from the belly, it is necessary to place the injured person on their back, and put their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the part away from the belly, put the head and the foot higher than the other parts, and similarly, if the wound is in one of the two parts, make sure that the injured part is higher than the other; and thus manage as I have said for large and moderate wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	For small wounds, use what is at hand, then apply a remedy that covers the entire wound with one hand, and bring together the lips; this is the common method of stitching, and it is that you hold an needle or several, according to the quantity of the wound's width, leaving a space of about two fingers from the edge of the wound, and then pass a needle or a strong thread through the skin on both sides, as far as you can pierce that part, and bring together the two threads of the skin in four places; then tie the thread into a double knot around the needle from both sides, then evenly bring together the edges of the wound, leaving a space of about two fingers, and then pass another needle; then tie the thread as you did with the first needle, and do not stop doing this according to what you have done with the needles, until the entire wound is closed; and let the needles be of medium thickness, between thin and thick, because thin needles cover the whole skin, and thick ones cannot enter well: for this reason, they should be of medium thickness; and do not put the needles too far from the skin and flesh, so that they do not cut and open the wound before sewing; and then cover the edges of the needles so that they do not stick to the injured part at night, and put tents or cloths on the edges of the needles to hold them, and leave them until the wound is sewn; this method of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because it requires only one needle or two to sew the second stitch, and it is that you bring together the edges of the skin and flesh in four places to an needle or a strong thread; and when you have pierced these edges all together, then remove the needle from the part where you started, as if you were sewing with a needle; and leave a space between each stitch the thickness of a finger.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I brought back the intestine after it had been out for 24 hours, and the wound was dressed with fresh bandages after 15 hours, and it was treated, and it healed.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And the mother thought he would die, and it was a miracle; and I did not treat him with any medicine, for I was in a place where none could be found; and I wiped the wound twice a day with old cotton and cleaned it with honey water until it healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Or I will tell you the two main ways of sewing: take the needle and the thread from behind the cloth; when it has pierced through the right side, bring the head of the needle out on the wrong side where you have inserted the needle, and pierce it from the other side of the cloth from behind; and the understanding of this sewing is that you sew as the furrier makes the furs, and that you leave one part of the wound once, and then sew the other part, until the sewing is completely finished.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second way of sewing, which Galen properly calls, is such that anyone can do, who assembles the two parts together naturally, and applies one of the main needles to the other main needle, in a similar manner: stick a needle or main needle close to the wounded part, and make it pierce only that one alone, and leave the two wounds; then turn the needle, and make it pierce from the front part inside, the two wounds, and then pierce both from the front part inside, in two other needles that are on the other side; and this is the most common way of sewing.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	If one says this word, and no one testifies to it, one must sew the belly with two needles, or one in each; and one must insert one needle from one side, and the other from the other, in the manner of those who braid corsets; and so that when the tear is in the belly, it is sewn more painfully than other stitches of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgments of the wound are such as the judgments of other wounds: and it is that when you clean the fresh wound to all its blood, provided that the art has moved it, you must return to the intestine and the cost; then put the powder in a charcoal jar, and if the art has moved it, you must put any ointment that is present, until the wound closes; and shave the hair, and be careful of the scissors, and the mirror; then treat the wound as the others, until it is healed; and if you do not have medicines, you must put cotton, as soon as it begins to close, and move it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you have no other medical knowledge in multiple situations where the wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound does not make communication with principal members, then it is necessary to treat lightly with oil of temperate heat, or with rose oil, and place it inside the wounds, and outside the bones; and if it causes pain or inflammation in the belly, and often happens, then you should counter with black wine clutches, and immediately if the inflammation comes to the intestine; and pierce inside, and cut out what is inside the large intestines, as they are easier to heal than the small ones.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine called "jeun" cannot be healed when it is raw, and this is due to the presence of veins that are in it, and due to the subtlety of the entire body, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the intestine jumps out of the wound, put it back in as you would the intestine when it is raw; and if it is old and turned black, then you must tie the part that is black, for there are veins and arteries in it; then cut away what is between the limbs, and hang the two ends from the part on the side of the wound outwards to align the extraction when the intestine falls, and the wound opens.
de la routure dou boueil	of the breaking of the boil
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is punctured, and the wound is small, if it can be closed in some men, because I saw that one man was killed by a lance; and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and was prolapsed and became a fistula, and inside there was excrement and pus; I put care according to what I knew, and did not cease to subtilize until it was healed, and the openings were closed.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw it healing, I doubted that the hairs were not in his intestines; and there was no harm, but he remained in better conditions, and eating and drinking; and some experimenters said that when one has a small wound in the intestine, they should be tied in such a way: take hot irons with large tongs, then gather the lips of the wound, and when the hot iron has opened the mouth, put it on top of the two lips, so that it holds its mouth open; and then cover the iron, and hold it in such a way that it cannot slip off, then put the other hot iron after in this manner until the wound is completely closed; and through the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	If the shoulder blade is burned internally and causes no harm to the joint, and it can be tied with a thin thread that is taken from the intestine of an animal, in this way: take the end of the intestine thread that is very dirty, and then tie it to the end of this thread with a thin silk thread, then pull the thread into the needle, and sew the intestine, and pull it back into the tear; and this way of stitching is no more than according to the way of faith and hope; and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the hollow intestines, there is no remedy or cure, except for subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of the fistula or that it is
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	that all wound or abscess, when it is covered, is generally called "fistula", and specifically when it is cut and opened.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And the fistula is according to the verity of the hard and white tissue, where there is no pain, and it is cut like the quill of an eagle; and sometimes it is clear and deep, and sometimes small and thick; sometimes small and sometimes enough; and I have spoken about it in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and there is no pus, except by one of the EIGHT causes: namely, by the smallness of the blood or flesh; or because of its malice; or because there is hard pus inside, and on the lips, which does not allow new pus to be formed; or there is too much pus; or the wounds are poisoned, and the matter is of bad quality; or the medicine is not good in the cure; or because the corruption is like pestilence; or because the property in the region is late digestion, and late health, and flowed by nature; or there are veins or bones: and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	It is necessary for me to tell you about the treatment of fistulas that is done by handwork.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Fistulas can occur in all members of the body; for there are fistulas that come to great veins, and to arteries, and to nerves, or to the face, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to any of the ribs, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet; and if they come to the property of the principal member, and similar ones.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	All fistulas that are of this kind are of great difficulty and there is only labor and ignorance; and if there is any fistula that does not come to the joint that I have said, and you have faith in the cure, and you know how to do it, take a lead or iron tent, if the fistula is straight, if the quill; and if the fistula is twisted, take a subtle tent of plaster, for the plasters penetrate around the twisting; and if the fistula has many holes and you cannot well encircle it with tents, clysterize one of the holes with medicine, for the moisture does not go from one hole to another, and cleanses; then carefully remove it, knowing whether there is bone or nerve, and if it is well covered in front, and ask the patient about the pain he feels when you press his hand, and the location where he feels it; and when you will know truly the location where it is, and whether it is far from joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, cut according to what I have told you, and remove the cause and the corrupted matter that is inside; and then cure as long as it is healthy, and if the fistula is deeply placed in the right place, it is necessary to cut as much as you can, then put soft tents in medicine, and push them into the top of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the superfluity that remains at the bottom; and then put ointments with clean cloth, until they are healthy; and if it is not healthy by this, cauterize as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted from the fistula, cut.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If the vein or nerves do not cause pain or harm to your principal limbs, as we have said; and if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackness, then remove all the corruption until it is completely gone, then cure the things that were injured for as long as it takes until they are healed; and if they are not healed, and remain as before, then do not go any further: if it is exposed and you wish to remove it as much as possible, and remove all the corruption, then restore the limb; and if it is thus healed, it is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If not, then it is too late for the corruption, so there is no other remedy except to wait for nature; and if there is a small bone corrupted, and you can pull it out with tenailles, then straighten it with the appropriate tool, and if there are many bones, then remove them all, and do not leave any behind; and if moisture makes it contrary, and there is no error or fear, then heat and moisture and charcoal, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot remove them within an hour, apply something stinking and putrefying to the wound, and leave it until the flesh is completely rotten around the bones, and then they will be more easily removed; and if it is a large bone, such as a leg or thigh, wait until the corruption has entirely rotted the bone, then reopen the wound; and if there is a great part of the corruption remaining, and comes near to the bone; if it must be so, cover it all with the corruption, and cure it until it is sound; and I will tell you of a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you may take example and aid in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	The young man was around 30 years old, who had pain in his leg due to a cause that came from within the body, so that the matter came to the leg, and he was infected with a large abscess, and there was no reason to open; but the doctor by their folly opened it so high that the abscess was opened, and they poured in a lot of matter, and it became a fistula, and many more suffered from weakness and moisture of the body; and many doctors sought cure within two years, and there was no cure in the art of hands, until I was called, and saw his leg and the medicines with which they were treating him, and what was flowing through the wounds to great pain; and he became red the body of the young man, and had a yellow color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I pitched a tent in one of these holes, and then I searched all the holes, and found that one was coming into contact with the other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I therefore withdrew, and dug into one of the holes until I discovered a part of the bone, and found it rotten and pierced, and the corruption was coming to the bone from inside; I saw that the rotten bone appeared to me, and I thought there was no other corruption except what I had seen; and I began to treat the wound with remedies, but I could not heal it; then I returned, and discovered the bone as before, and found the continuous corruption in the bone, and saw it, and then I removed it, and I was unable to heal the limb; but I could only cut around a palm of the bone, and treat it entirely, then I returned it with remedies; it was healed and healed quickly, and it did not require any further treatment except for the weakness of the pain, which could not bear it, and the fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	Because for the evacuation of blood, it often happened, but he was completely cured, and in the place of the bone, a hard callus formed, and it was of good disposition and had no harm or contradiction throughout, neither to the other nor to the coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be done in this way: take a piece of linen, and stretch it at the head of the bone that opens, and command that it not be extended upwards; and put another piece of linen larger than the first on top of the linen, and lay it on the callus above the bone, and extend the head, so that you remove the rotten callus outside, and uncover the callus above the place where you see it should be, so that it does not become rotten; and put a bandage or a poultice outside the bone to cover the rotten callus; and it should be done so that one can see and feel the corruption, and it should be done again another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	If the tooth is rotten and does not open, and the decay is in the middle or in one part, remove the filling from the whole tooth; then put the wax on one part to another part of the decay, and let the wax be as long as possible from the decay, as we have said; and if the decay is in the joint, cut the joint where the decay is, and let the bone or what it contains from the other part; and if the decay is in the continuation of two joints, there is no other way than to cover it; and if the decay is at the tip of the hand or foot, this thing is very difficult, but nevertheless you should inquire about this decay, how it opens; and clean it in all ways that you can, but do not make the vein or nerve opposite; and know that the tools for covering these bones are many, according to the shape of the bones and the appearance of the teeth, and their thickness and thinness, their size and smallness, and their hardness; and therefore you should arrange each tool according to the likeness of the work; and know that the work will show you the tool that you have to use, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of diseases; so consider the tool that you have to use according to what it is suitable for.
dou feu	with great heat
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The joints will rot either due to their own condition or due to weakness; and when you have treated the corrosion with medicines, and it does not improve, then you must cut off that member up to the joint where the corrosion comes from, so that the pain escapes by death or by malice, which is greater, due to the lack of the member; and the signs are that the member becomes black, so that it seems as if it were burned by fire, and afterwards becomes darker, then those corrosions spread from member to member, and take hold of the whole body; if you hasten to cut off, and if the corrosion is at the head of the toe, then cut it off, and do not give them any time to come to your hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	If it comes from the hand, if the copper is at the joint, so that the corrosion does not come to the arm; and if it comes to the arm, if the copper at the shoulder; and if it passes the shoulder, it is death, and there is no remedy other than the quantity of its virtue; and thus do as follows when the corrosion comes or pierces: if it comes to the first joint, if the copper after the other joint; and if it comes to the bone, if the copper all the bone; and if it goes up the leg, if the copper at the knee joint; and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy than the patient's death; and the manner of the copper or the bandage for the limb is that you bind it above and below, and extend some bandages on one side, and some bandages on the other side, and uncover the bone until it is exposed; then the copper or bandage, and put a piece of linen on each part so that the copper does not touch the healthy flesh, and comes to the injury or abscess.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	If blood flows when you are working, cauterize the limb immediately with strong fire, or apply some powders that stop the bleeding; then return to your medicine until it is complete, then bind the injured member with a clean bandage, and treat it until it is healed; and I will tell you what happened to a man who was in great pain: a black spot appeared on his skin that seemed like burning fire, and that corrosion first appeared on his chest, spreading all over his body; and when the honorable ones saw the corrosion, they covered the wound, and he was healed; but long after that, the corrosion appeared on his arm, and it came to me, and I put things on his wound after cleaning the body, and could not stop the corrosions; and he said that I would cut off his hand, and I did not want, because I had hope of reflecting the matter; and he also doubted that if I cut off his hand, he would not die, for the virtues of the man were weak; and he gave up all hope, and returned to his home, and covered his wound, and was healed; and I have not told you anything else except for what is done in other cases.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	Never does an abscess form in a lean limb, and it lingers so long that it causes a great collection of pus; then it bursts and perforates, and the pus escapes, as if from a vessel; and the skin above is also as delicate as cloth, and does not corrode the bone, nor the nerve, and such a disease is called "sinus", and is not called "fistula"; but if it is so long that it reaches the bone from the outside, it is called "fistula"; and the skin is such that you cover that skin all around, and specifically when it is delicate, as if it were cloth; and it does not corrode for its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	If the skin is hardened and the corruption is not yet formed in the bone, and the skin is charred, then use this ointment: look if the breasts are large, and the nipples smell badly, then make an Egyptian medicine as follows: take equal parts of milk, oil, and lentils, cook them in a pot over the fire until the medicine turns red and thickens like honey; then add water according to your need, and make it into a thick or thin paste, and apply it to the breasts, and bind it tightly; let the ointment remain on for two hours, then remove it by wiping; do this many times until the breasts are clean and soft; if the pain is too great, and the Egyptian medicine and the ash water do not help, then use a thin paste of honey and wine, where the honey has the property to cleanse and the wine makes the skin soft; and when you have done this, and you have confirmed that the breasts are clean, then apply a definite plaster made with rose oil and wine, or use some medicines and ointments, as I have mentioned their properties for treating wounds; and if the nipple of the breast is small, and the ointment cannot enter, then enlarge it with a small needle, and put in an Egyptian tent or basilicon ointment until it is wide enough; and if the wound is too large, then let it remain open for as long as the ointment can enter, and if the nipple that is above the ointment is also affected, then cover it with a cloth or the lower part of the bandage where the ointment is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	For when the bone is broken, do not leave any charcoal on it; and if you cannot cover the wound as you see fit, arrange it in such a way that the bone moves to the lowest point where it is, for when the bone is broken, do not leave any charcoal on it, and if you cannot cover the wound as you see fit, arrange it in such a way: that the bone moves lightly downwards, and leaves nothing of the bone; and take consolidative medicines to put on the wound, and place it on the cloth that covers all the wound; then cover the forces at the point of the bone a little more than the first, since they are firmly attached to the other cloth according to the quantity of the bone, and place it on the bone to align the bone, and do not remove the large cloth until after many days once; and that which is on the bone, often remove to align the bone, and see what comes from the bone, whether it is poison or little or enough, or digested, or undigested; and take precaution if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been extended in a certain way and you see the nature that springs up over the cloth, then remove the bandage and approach health; and then remove it in the morning, or the next day, and when you remove the wound, change the other cloth, and renew the dressing.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast is ingested undigested after many days, break it up so that the breast does not turn bad.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons are cut after long time, do not despair of health, for health approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are men who take long time to heal their wounds, and those who do the opposite; and if undigested food is ingested after many days, break it up so that the breast does not turn bad; and if the breast takes a long time to harden, and is far away, use medicines of moist substance and dry in virtue, such as oil of roses, and the last medicine is vitriol, and it is the best medicine; take oil of roses, and mix with old wine evenly in substance; then cook and use; and the same thing is made good when boiled and grown, when oil of roses is not present, or you take wormwood and aloe and incense, and grind it, and the powder on the honey as it is on the fire; and then apply the cloth, and place it on the breast, and never administer a physician long, and roots of lily celestial, which is also like flour and hundred; and use simple or compound: grind them, and make powder, and put on the honey that I have said, and use; and if the cure is long and not cured by this cure, then break up the corruption and make impression in the bone, or in hard members, or in limbs; if the cure of the cure of fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the elbow
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Panarice is an abscess that arises from the elbow due to a pouch of the hand, or a pocket, or by chance it arises in other places; and when it is opened, and no care is taken, if the abscess spreads, and corrodes and drips blood so much that it reaches the root of the elbow, and perhaps corrodes all of it; and there comes corrosions just to the bone, until it causes a strong stench, and the affected part is red.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the cure does not improve, then you must remove all the excess that remains of the elbow, then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cauteries are very helpful when the bones are healthy and the joint is healthy; and if the joint is close to the skin and begins to poke, and the wound, then it is necessary to remove the iron from the joint that does not pierce the skin, and place it above, and gently and lightly cover this joint with medicines of burning and corrosive nature to eliminate everything; then cure the pain until it is healthy.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corrosion is in the bone, then cover it and remove it, because as much as the bone rots and is, it cannot be healed; and if you see the other rotting, then cover it with a bandage as mentioned above, then cure it until it is healthy; and if it is fierce, and bleeding, and it feels great pain, then it is necessary to first cleanse it; then cover the joint with a thin, sharp cut across, and make sure that the cut does not reach the skin that is outside the joint, because the pains would be too great; and if there is, then place something above that soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain of a sore hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The blisters that arise in the hands of some men are all charred, and sometimes they have bones, and sometimes they have splinters, and sometimes they have thorns, and none of them arise at the root of the joint, or in any other way.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Those who arise in no other way of the joint do not move, and those who arise at the joint of the joint may move; the size of the charred one is light, in the manner: cut it at its root with a wide spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Those who arise at the root of the joint are difficult to cure: if you have the copper.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the one who is born or must be placed at the back, it is necessary that you first cut the round bone to the bone, then cut the bone to a suitable silk for this, then cure it until it is healthy.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The similar things that come together come from birth, or from the wounding of a wound, or from burning with fire, or from similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	If it is necessary that you cut the wounding, so that the one that must return according to its natural forms; then put between two tents or moistened cloths in rose oil, so that they do not stick together; or you put between two pieces of thin leather, until the wounds are healed, as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If it comes to either of its two ends with the palm, then adjust it as it should be.
des vils	of the wicked
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	The veins are large and swollen with excessive melancholy, which come from many members of the body; and more so in the legs of those who walk and work and carry, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Then you must administer no purgative of clay, and then the healthy bishop's herb.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The treatment of the iron is in two ways: one is to adjust it and remove the black blood; and the other way is to open the vein and remove all the blood.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The tail is done in this way: first, the first leg of the sharp hot water very strongly, until the large without subtiliez, then strain the leg with the bad side below the hip; then cut the vein in the groin, or in II or III, of a wide incision, then release and draw out the black blood to your hand, from one to the other, as much as much of such can suffer the virtues of the bad side; and then tie it, and command that he be shaved with meat broth; and repeat the evacuation and cleaning when the veins are flat, and not to the bad side.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The treatment of the shoulder according to this method: if there is much hair, first shave the leg with the bad joint, then put it in a bath, and heat the leg with hot water until it turns red and swells the veins; if you do not have a bath, heat it over the fire, and then apply a cloth soaked in warm water to the long vein at the back of the knee, or in the part below the knee; then rub the skin at every part until it appears when touched; it will appear red and black, and look like a white rope; then draw out the blood from the vein, as much as it takes to make the skin appear, and then let it rest for three days; then scrape the skin over the vein until it appears, then apply it to the wound, as you have done before; then apply another bandage to the other side, if you have experience in such matters; then let it rest, and apply a poultice to the second bandage; then cut the bandage from one end to the other, until it is all gone, then apply; and if you cannot draw and lift it, insert an awl through the thread strongly doubled, and pull and draw it, and draw out the blood from the thread, turning your hand from one side to the other, as much as there is; be careful that it does not stick, for if it sticks, it cannot be drawn or lifted, and it causes harm to the joint; and when you have treated it all, put a soft cloth moistened with wine and rose oil on the wound of the sore place; and cure until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the limb is bent and twisted and swollen all together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must torment it but do not cover it, and treat it as we have previously described.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The form of iron that covers the limb if it is hooked and does not cut through, so it does not cover the vein; and it is large in size, because if it were fine, it would cover the vein, but if it is large as we have said, and this is the form:
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is inflamed in the legs, in warm parts where there are no herbs or trees, and in dry land where there is no moisture; and by chance it arises from another part than the legs, and this happens due to the putrefaction that comes out of the skin, as it comes from within the flesh and blood, inflamed between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this wound are such that it comes in the leg a very large inflammation, then the limb changes, and the wound begins to protrude, like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the wound is open, it is necessary to wrap around a piece of plaster the size of one and a half palm's breadth by two palms in width, and the nose, and leave the plaster on the leg, and every time it is not there, if it wraps around the plaster, and the nose; and if it is too long, then take part of it, and wrap the remaining part, and do not cover it at its root, until it is completely out; for if you cover it, it will retreat into the flesh, and cause abscess and putrefaction in the limb, and severe illness; therefore it is necessary that it be treated very little by little near the top, and nothing remains or rots; and this wound never occurs when it is treated from the palms of length, or ten, and some have come to me, to which it issued ten palms in length, and when you cover it, if it bursts or punctures, and pierces deep, so that everything comes out; and let the matter inside be removed, and administer medicines by injection for putrefaction every day, then cure as with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And never rain on this vein, and especially when it opens into the joint of the thumb, or the little finger, and it often causes much pain, and from which it suddenly falls; therefore, as we have said before, cure it accordingly.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	births between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called in our land "cattle disease", because it often affects cattle, and it is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and goes up and down the body, and is felt by all members in succession, until it reaches the skin where it went, and jumps out; and it is caused by some humors, such as worms and lumbricus and ascarides or intestinal worms; and there is doubt about its harm, because when it goes through the body, and it goes up to the head, and it comes to the brain, perhaps it enters, and destroys the brain; and this has happened many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see that it needs to be cured and drawn, then you can only do so when it goes: therefore it is necessary to hold the limb above and away from a very tightly bound bandage, then cut through it and draw it out, and if it comes out in front of the char, and you do not pull it out, then cauterize with fire above, until it dies; and the greatest harm it does is that it corrupts the oil, as we have said; and if you see it coming or near the oil, then hold it away from it well, then cut through it and draw it out; and it is necessary to use the bandage of healing for the bodies of medicines soluble for the humors which cause diseases, and if it becomes putrid, then use it for cooking.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of the pain that comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and it is a pain that comes to certain limbs, and then moves from one limb to another; and I saw what I will tell you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to a woman with pain, and she revealed one of her arms, and I saw a small swelling in the armpit of that arm; and soon after, I saw it rise as if a snake were at the shoulder, more quickly than anything, just like live silver when it cuts through flesh to another; the pain departed from that limb, and went into the shoulder, and then a little later it spread throughout the body, until it reached the other arm; then she told me that she had turned around inside her body, as I saw.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was greatly amazed how she moved from one member to another, for I had never seen this disease move in this way.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	However, I had seen that it was possible for one member to move to another, but I had not seen it in this way; and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body, and her veins were exposed, and because that constraint appeared; and it did not appear in this way to those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and covered veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see how to cure this disease, and the pain feels as we have said, if it opens up as we have described, then hold it above and below firmly, and then cauterize the limb; and if you do not see it in your eyes, then treat the cause of the constraint, such as fetid pills, and serapin pills, and similar others.
des saiettes	arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are various, according to their appearances and according to the types of bodies they pierce.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The diversity of them is such that there are those with large points, and small ones, and barbed ones, and blunted ones; and those with two angles, and those with tails, and those with pieces; and one that pierces any member, depending on the manner: if it pierces in a principal member, like the neck, head, heart, lungs, stomach, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When it pierces any of these members, and the sign of death, which I will tell you about later, appears: then you must proceed with the extraction of this arrow, for many die afterwards in various conditions; and when this bad sign does not appear, and the arrow is not completely removed, then remove it and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the signs of the head when the arrow pierces and perforates the bone, and the face that is above the head, is when there is blindness and dizziness and vertigo and fainting, and inflammation and fainting of the tongue, and spasm and confusion of the mind, and vomiting of bile; and perhaps it is without force in the nostrils, or the ears; and perhaps it is the speech and voice; and the white discharge from the wound, resembling pus, and also like boiling water, and if these signs appear to you, then take care of the patient, and remove the arrow if it is not embedded.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The signs of the shoulder when it dislocates or breaks, are that it is near the right breast, and also feels as if it were stuck in a hard thing, not empty; and perhaps the shoulder moves like the chicken, and there is black blood, and cold sweat, and syncope: therefore without doubt the patient will die.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign that the arrow does not enter the body is that without any bubbles coming out of the wound, and the throat swells, and the limb changes color, and it breathes high and seeks the warmth.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow dislocates in the skin, it is below the small ribs; and it throws out great blood and great pain and breaths; and they move all the member of the shoulder.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrowhead or stomach, by chance, falls out of the wound, nothing of the undigested meat.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrowhead or stomach falls out of the wound without any intestines protruding, there is no hope for the cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrowhead falls into the bladder, and the urine comes out and flows out, and the pain is very great: cut open the wound as it is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other member, such as the arm and neck and throat and shoulder and back and spine and hips and knees, and the member similar, are safe according to many conditions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or the artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me, because of what you were doing differently.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to a man who was shot in the calf at the root of the knee: I tried to remove it, and pulled it out from the other side, away from the ear grease, and he was healed quickly without much pain.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And pulled out an arrow that had been shot into the oil grease away from the paper away from the skin, and the arrow was intact, only reaching the tip of the wound, and it was a large arrow like a Turkish spear, made of all light iron without ears; the wound was healed, and nothing bad happened to him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And I removed an arrow from the neck of a Christian, and it was an Arabic arrow with ears: I cut off the barbs, and carefully worked until I removed it, and the Christian was healed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And I removed an arrow from a man, who had it in his neck or belly, and I thought he would die; and after he had passed thirty days, his condition did not change; I cut above the arrow, and widened it, and carefully removed it, and there was no bad outcome.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you want to remove an arrow from a man who had it in his back or shoulder, and the wound was healed over; and the arrow remained inside, and his natural conditions did not change, and he found no harm in any of his natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And another man, who had an arrow in his face, and was laid on the wound; and thus remained without suffering great pain; and many similar cases.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And an arrow was removed from the man of the king, who had it in his neck, and was slightly tilted to the right side; and the arrow was completely removed, I was called to the care after it had been out for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I examined it with a very fine needle, and felt nothing; and he felt pain and pricking from his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was the tip of the arrow that I put on the wound with a strong digestive agent, because the wounds did not swell; and it appeared to me that the arrows were coming out.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I put the ointment later, and immediately healed the wound, and the pain lasted a long time, until he felt the arrow inside his nose; and he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I put medicine with a corrosive agent on the wound later, as long as it was open, and I tried to remove it, and felt the tip of the arrow inside; then I inserted more of that corrosive medicine into the opening of the wound, until the patient clearly showed me where the arrow was; and it passed well through the wound in about four months, and then it discharged the splinters, and one part and another, and could not be removed; therefore I continued to subtly and ingeniously manipulate instruments, until I got the arrow well made, according to how its form would come out at the end of this chapter, until I extracted it and restored the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And the doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored: I restored it nonetheless, and it was sewn up, and the injuries were healed entirely.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Or I told you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you might place your care on what I did not say, for books cannot comprehend everything; but wise masters understand many things, and know what is present and lacking, thus they find new work and new tools for the understanding of strange things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows do not issue from the body unless in two ways: either by the way they enter, or by another part; and the one that exits by the way it entered is an arrow through the muscles, and has never exited once.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if she does not jump now, let her wait until the charred flesh is completely surrounded and softened; and also if she is stuck in the bone, and cannot get out, let her wait for several days, and move it every day; and then she will jump, and if she does not jump, then pierce all around with a subtle needle, until the flesh around is expanded, and then draw it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is stuck in the head bone, and goes towards one of the belly's ventricles, and any of the accidents that I have mentioned above to the patient: if you do not draw it out, but let it wait until it is even after several days, because if the arrow comes towards the brain, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is not stuck only in the bone, and does not come out by itself, and remains there for several days without causing harm, then use the device to pull it out.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is deeply stuck and cannot be pulled out, then apply tar as I have told you; then treat the limb until it is healed.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is embedded in the body and cannot be seen, then seek a skilled surgeon to remove it; and if you feel it, then use any suitable instrument to remove it; and if you cannot because of the narrowness of the wound, and the depth of the arrow, and there are no bones, nerves, or veins, then leave it until the wound is large enough; and remove the arrow if you can, and if there are ears on the arrow that hold it in place, then carefully cut off the part that is stuck deeply, and then break or crush the ears of the arrow until you can remove it; and be careful not to break the arrow while removing it.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	If you cannot do it once, then pull the limb towards the body until it is fully extended, then pull it back, for the extraction must be done gently.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	If the bleeding from the vein goes against you, then follow the advice we have given in our chapter on treatment; and guard against incising the nerve and the vein, and use caution as you draw out the arrow without causing harm, quickly or slowly, tightly or loosely; and put the wound back according to its original form when the arrow fell out, for this is the greatest help there is, and if you cannot do it, then put it back according to what the signs tell you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The arrow that comes from another part, where it opens nothing of it, or the skin is swollen in a place where one can see or feel it: cut then above, as far as the barbs can be taken, and then extract it: if it has now broken.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is retained in the bone, turn your hand round and round until it enters the bone, and expands the bone, then remove it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot come out, leave it still, and then begin the extraction again until it comes out; and if there is any of the arrow left, and you see that it has pierced everything, and if it is sharp, and you administer it gently, so that the tip of the arrow enters the hair of the instrument; and then pull it out, and if the arrow is caught, pull the instrument in with the point entering, to facilitate the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	If the arrow is stuck, it is necessary that you cut out the entire piece where the poison is, if possible, then treat the wound as appropriate.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow pierces or sticks in the belly or bladder or ribs, and it is near, and you can cut it off, then cover the wound if possible; do not cover the vein and nerve, then extract it, then treat the wound as appropriate, and cure it until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the forceps used to extract arrows is like an owl's beak, and this is its form:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many ways: large, medium, and small, according to the amount of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the arrowhead is also like the beak of a bird, to stick at the point of the arrow, as in this way:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The shape of the barbs for sticking and for holding is like this:
des voinnes dou cors communes	Veins common to the body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	There are 31 veins that can be tapped from, of which there are 16 main ones, namely: two that are behind the ears, which are called "herbech"; and the two arteries that are in the temples, and the two veins that are in the armpits of the shoulders, which are called "aspires"; and the vein that is in the forehead; and the vein that is at the base of the nose; and the two jugular veins that are on the neck; and the two veins that are in the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich"; and the two veins that are outside the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins that are commonly bled from are three in each arm: one is the cervical, and is on the left side, and is called by the common people "the neck vein"; and the middle one is called "the breast vein", and is composed of the cervical and the basilic, and is called by the common people "the chest vein"; and the basilic is on the right side, and is called by the common people "the stomach vein", and is above the fossa, and is that which is bled from, which opens manifestly into the hollow.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the saphenous vein is the one that is between the auricular and the annular, and it is on the right arm; and in the leg and hand there are three veins: one is outside the corbeure of the left costeit chest, and the second one is at the ankle of the right costeit; and the third one which is called "nesse", which is at the ankle of the other costei; and in the other leg there are three veins.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The first sentence is: "For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	The treatment of the two arteries that are in the two temples is to puncture them with a needle, and then insert a seton, and plug them with custom-made wool; and the quality of this treatment is as I said: it is that the pain is strange, so much so that the two veins appear openly; and it feels like the hair is detached from the side of your head, then sign of inflammation; then lift the skin above the vein at the top of your forehead, and pull out the needle, and lift the vein upwards, and cover it, as you did in the other two veins, and treat the blood according to your necessity; then remove the pain, and put your finger on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it; and then form a bandage, and leave it until it is healed; and we have spoken of this and its treatment and extraction, at the beginning of this book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The health of the vein in the forehead is as valuable as the health of the cephalic diseases of the face, and headaches, and dizziness; and the quality of the disease is such that the pain strains his neck, until the vein appears; then take the instrument called «fosseur», which has this form:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And place the point above the vein, and hold it with your hand or something else, and let the blood issue according to the quantity you see; then release the neck from the pain, and tie the vein until it is healthy and never again in a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	It is not necessary that the flames be too hot; and the safe way is to hold it away from the bone, for fear of breaking the flames when they are thin.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The safe way to treat the two veins that are in the two armpits is to hold it at the elbow, and at the root, and at the shoulder, and at the back of the neck, and at diseases of the face; and the quality of their treatment is that the pain is strained by twisting any part, as before; then the safe way, and let the treatment be done from a little distance away from the flame, a little long and wide, for there is no char.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flames are thin, by chance it may break; then apply pressure to the blood, as much as you have skill, and then tie with a thread, and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The vinegar of the vein is good for a headache, and for swelling, and for diseases of the face, such as migraines and redness that comes in the face, and constantly when it is ancient; and the quality of the vinegar is that the pains strain their neck, then strain their vein to your right hand, and take the thin flame long, and put it on the lip in the space that is between the II nostrils, because the vein does not open well, and the blood will begin to stop now; and do not move too much in the beginning, and apply pressure to the blood according to your need, then tie it for one night, because it is soon restored; and this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The salve of the two ingredients helps to narrow the alainne, and at the beginning of the melting, and with many diseases, and with impetigo, and with corrosion, and with herpes, and estiomenes; and the quality of the salve is such that the pains strange their col out of one and the other, as we have said; and so the masters are above the chief of the pain, and the pains sit on the first seat, then clean the wound long a little widely, then drain the blood frequently, or as much as the matter requires; then do the other side in the other wound, then remove the ligature, and hold the wounds steadily, that the pains do not strangle; and let it be applied just before morning, that the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	of the health of the liver
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The health of the liver above helps in the mouth, and prevents corruption of the gums, and cracks in the lips, and pain and swelling inside.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the quality of this health is to make the pain disappear in front of you, and hold its neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at both veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left, and they are known by the fact that they are black, and by the fact that there are small black veins around them: match both, and if you do not know them, and if you are in doubt, match the largest of each part, and do the same for both veins that are above and below, because it is the same way.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	of the tongue's swelling
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The swelling of the veins that are outside the tongue helps after the swelling of the cephalic, and it is from the tightness of the throat, and the diseases of the eye, and the diseases of the mouth; and the quality of the swelling is that the diseases lie between your hands before the sun, and you lift up the tongue, and look outside on each side a black vein: heal both, and do not move too much, for outside are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the neck that are commonly healed are healed in two ways: either by pinching at all the flame mirroring large, or by a delicate way if they cut through, and is called "anesil"; and they are large and delicate according to the width and tightness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the flame mirror is very famous, and it is as wide as you see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it has a job to open the veins that are closed by large blood clots, and contain large blood and disturbance; and this is the form of the flame mirror.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	And it is more delicately pointed, and is for cleaning the thin veins, where there is thin blood clot.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The cleansing of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are outside the neck, and where the collarbone, and where the shoulder, and where the stomach; and it is important for the cleaner to clean well, and to remove the artery that is outside.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if he cuts the artery, and blood flows out, then it should be staunched, as I have said; and it should not be pricked with fire, but cut off as we have done with anus.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the basilica does not open clearly, then you must reset it and change it; or you want to remove any rain from it, or you save in its place the vein of the arm: it opens clearly; and cut off with fire as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you see that the vein of the arm is known, then it is also necessary to reset the arm until you touch the vein; then sign the vein of the wrist, and then bind the arm, and cut off the vein with fire as we have said; and be careful not to strike the artery when you see the vein swell, for it is the artery: avoid it then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it emerge high as the urine of a child, and the blood is red and thin, it is from an artery: then hurry, and put your hand long on it, then remove your hand when the blood stops flowing, which often happens; hold the arm still, and let it be, and do not move the hairs; and bear the pain, and do not move it until it is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the blood does not stop flowing, and it hurts, and the medicine is not present, then cut the artery if it opens, because the main vein will retract; and the blood stops flowing.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	Take a sharp needle from a hypodermic syringe, and make it into a hook, and take one of the halves and tie it securely to the other end; if it is not stained, that is good; if not, then the cure, as we have said, with powders that stop bleeding; and the stopping of the blood does not last for many positions of the small wound, and the position of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The cleansing of the vein in the middle helps that it treats blood above and below, because it is composed of the basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said; and it is necessary for the cleaner to search for the vein that is below, and if it does not appear immediately, and he finds the vein, he inflates it and the wound heals, and perhaps it cannot be healed; and this vein opens often, and if it does not open in any men due to its subtlety, then you must use the cleaning instrument again; and exclude the vein from your power.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if he has a vein between the two nerves, make it long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The puncturing of the cephalic vein helps, as it draws blood from the head, and helps with the eyes; and it is best to puncture at the olive oil or mint flame, for this is the safest of all veins, because it has no nerve or artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	Nevertheless, it is best to seek the lightest vein, and do not harm anything if you must the first time, and restart; and by chance, some men's veins swell at first, but it does not harm anything.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of health depends on your thoughts.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you need to know about healing is that healing is only done to maintain health and to prevent diseases from coming; and healing should be done in one of the three veins that are: cephalic, basilic, and median; and if you should heal at the beginning of the day, and in autumn and winter after fasting, when the sign of repletion appears; and if you should heal on the first or third day, after two hours or three days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The healing that is administered to diseases has no determined time, but rather it depends on the urgency of the hour or the need; and it should not be healed in children under 14 years old, nor pregnant women except for four months until the seventh.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	Do not allow those who have passed sixty years to undergo surgery.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	If anyone wishes to undergo surgery, it is necessary for him to cleanse his intestines with a light clyster if he has much feces retained, so that the veins do not draw harmful superfluities into the principal members; and one should not undergo surgery if he is too fat from meats, or if he is bloated, or if he has hydros; and if one wishes to undergo surgery after colic passion, vomiting, diarrhea, and frequent traveling, pregnancy, nursing, and all the virtues of the arm or body; then subtly draw out the humors, as much as possible without being too thin, through foods and drinks and medicines, if you have the power; then take a bath or do nothing that might hinder drawing out the blood, to thin the blood, and to heal from the vein during the third hour, as we have said; and guard against work, needlework, luxury, and similar things; and be tied and joined, and let the surgeon be higher than those who are being operated on, and let him rub his hand twice or three times, then gently move the limb above the middle, for when it is too stiff or weak, it cannot correct itself; and then rub the wound with the palm of his hand until the veins swell, and feel if they bleed; then moisten the wound with a drop of old oil, then place his right hand on top of the vein of the wound where he wishes to operate, so that the vein does not fail to be drawn.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that flee as quickly as strings to the scribe, and some that are plain in their thinness, such that when one puts them over the flame, they retreat from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus are those; and if the scribe opens the vein, then the wound is too tight, because it is necessary for the scribe to be aware of these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the scribe opens the vein the first time, it is good; but if not, then he should restart a little below that place or above hastily, if the veins are not inflamed.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the joint is swollen, and the pain subsides, let it rest for one or two days, and do not bind the arm: perhaps an abscess will form; do not enter water, then begin cleaning again if it suits him; and if the wound is small, or the skin is slightly cut and you doubt that there is as much blood as you saw, then apply the fire directly to the wound; and work carefully, as long as the joint is swollen; for this often happens, when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	And if you see the joint swollen, do not begin cleaning again, and put a little oil on it, for it reduces the flow of blood, and is soothing in this joint like oil; and thus administer the oil in every cleaning to stop the flow of blood; and the same thing is done with triangular and bandage dressings, when they are placed on the wound; and gently remove the skin when it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	If there are large abscesses that often occur, even when it is not healed until this time or the opening of the vein is small, then you must hurry, and place an absorbent sponge soaked in boiling and salted water on the limb for an hour; and it is necessary to do this after the issue of the blood from the vein, and if it remains on the limb for any time without turning black or green, then you must not remove it; and if you see, place something of aloes or of myrrh mixed in honey or jelly on it.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often there is an abscess and appearance of the pus on the base of the cathedral: put your hand over it, and if you compress the limb too much with your hand, that is the wrong appearance.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, do not put anything on it that we have said, for by chance you might cut the artery; but make a dry bandage to strengthen the limb, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And draw out each wound according to the quantity of its virtue and the color of the wound.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the wound is black, let it bleed until it turns red; and if you see it large, let it bleed until it becomes thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is appropriate for one who is wounded and has a profession of arrow extraction, to make a larger wound, and let the flames be wide; and for the weak, do the opposite, and let them rest often, and they should be bandaged by cutting across, not by pinching; and this method of bandaging is safe from the corrosion of arrows and the compression of nerves, and it is better than the bandaging done long or wide.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for one who has a tendency towards the bandaging, it is appropriate to give bread soaked in the juice of grated apples; if they are hot-blooded, take out the arrow three or four times; and if they are cold-blooded, change the bread soaked in honey syrup or aromatic honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and sweet fragrant syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	If he pales at the sight of blood after losing much blood, then it is necessary for him to drink a broth of meat and an aromatic syrup, and use other things that we have said in the division or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of blood.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to stretch out his arm and bleed again, then it is necessary when he is weakened by much bleeding, that he bleeds a little bit at a time, according to the amount of its continuous virtue.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And if he wants to bleed his arm again after the first bleeding, and he is very weak, then he bleeds seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And those who wish to heal on the other side, they must heal at the second hour or at night.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For it has much blood inside the body that is already heated, and causes fever; so one must draw out a great quantity, and widen the vein until it ceases to bleed; then one must wait for all the conditions of healing, and put one's hand on the pulses when they are healed, so that the dead does not return in place of the pulse, and this happens many times when the healer is negligent; and it does not matter if you see the arm becoming weak, and making blood come out the second time, and the vein is closed, that one presses firmly; or if it is crooked, one stretches the arm quickly, for this would be bad; but let it heal the second time; or if the bleeding does not stop at the point of the flame, and put a small amount of salt re-dissolved in boiling water, and press firmly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	If it is seen that it is swollen, let it alone and do not press it until the abscess is calmed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to draw blood the second time, let it be drawn from the same limb or from the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein is drawn in place of the arm because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the manner of drawing blood is that the hairs are inserted in hot water until they become red; then it is moved gently so that the vein appears well, then draw blood through the middle, not too narrow or too long; and let the punctures be wide, and draw blood well near the joint of the hand, and if it cannot be released, put the hand in hot water, and let the blood flow out until you have enough; and if it is still stuck, do not turn the hand in hot water again, for it causes more harm than good; and drawing blood from this vein is safer than all other veins, as there are no arteries or nerves.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The salve of the savior of the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is the way: strain the hand, and boil in hot water until the blood flows out; if the salve is against the grain, and if you apply it with the whole hand, it will not hurt; and do not change it too quickly, for the nerves are all exposed to the char, and then put the hand in hot water, if it is not frozen in the wound, and it cannot come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the arrow as much as is necessary, put oil and silk on the wound to stitch quickly, and do this for each part.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The right hand sinew of the forearm is good for the disease of the mouse, and do everything as I have told you to the right side.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The sinew of the saphenous vein is good for all diseases that are outside the body, such as marsh diseases, and retention of fluids, and disease of the kidneys, and of the hips and legs in old age, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the quality of its sinew is that the diseases are driven out quickly in hot water, and rubbed on the vein until it perishes, and tied above the joint; and the vein is at the elbow, and by passing through the elbow much rain goes out; therefore the sinew of the large vein, or at the elbow, is more useful.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you have the healthy ones above the wound, and you guard against the nerves that are exposed, and the healthy one crosses as in covering; and let the flames be behind.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if it cannot come out without harm, put the wound in the high place, and let the blood drain well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if it must be bandaged the first time, start the second one above a little, because the legs are salty; do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and so make the bandage of the other wound equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The leg of the wound is at the knee of the thigh, and its bandage is worth the pain of the back, when it is for an arrow.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the qualities of his sanity are such that the hairs between or in bathing, and is strange above the knee four times in twisting, for otherwise it does not open the vein; and if it opens, then heal it in all ways that you can, and across; and it is better to cover it, for the legs are clean, and it is very often done by hand.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not heal it, then no rain of those who open or close two pints, and towards the small toe, and guard against the nerves; and correct so much blood as you see, and then release the ligament, and put above cotton and hold it steady; it is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	of suction cups
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Suction cups are made of horns, or of brass, or of glass; and ventosation is done in two ways: either by pricking and drawing blood, or without pricking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this suction without pricking is done in two ways: either at all times, or not at all; and suction that is done by pricking and drawing blood is done in twelve places on the body, of which one is entirely on the back; and the others are under the collarbone; and the other two are on the ribs; and the suction below the chin; and the suction on the shoulders; and the suction on the knees; and the suction on the ankles; and the suction on the heels; and the suction does not treat blood, except for small veins that are scattered in the body, and for this reason it does not weaken anyone, as is done with the drawing of blood; and it should not be administered, neither at all times nor not at all, in any disease that comes from repletion, until the whole body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if necessary for diseases, one must venesect, or by habit, if we mistrust the patient, let us venesect every hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in each ten; for there are some who, when they have business to venesect, have great pain; and some who experience repletion and redness in their face, and in their head, and in their neck, and darkness in their eyes; and some who taste blood in their mouth, and swallow it, and reach for blood; and there are some who sing, and see through a bloody mist and drown and die and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the middle of the month, we command them to fast after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The cleansing of the muscle helps to alleviate the headache… that comes from them, and it should only be done after the evacuation of all the blood; and this fasting is in place of the cleansing of the cephalic, and it should only be used by those who are of cold complexion or who have diarrhea, because this does great harm; and for this reason, it should not be used by those who are guards or who have other cold diseases.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who often become unconscious, it is necessary to place the vacuum a little lower due to the uncertainty of unconsciousness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The ventouse on the neck is in place of the head and the chin, and therefore it is necessary to place it at the narrowest point, and at the front of the throat, and everywhere, and for replenishment; and it should be placed a little loosely, because if it is held too tightly, it causes unconsciousness or stomach pain and pain in the chest.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The ventouse on the two ribs of the neck is necessary for head pain, and itching and numbness, and choking, and pain at the roots of the teeth, and it is in place of the health of the chin; and it is necessary to command the patient to place his hand when putting it on, so that he does not compress the artery, and does not cause bleeding from the blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	The winds of the mouth cause disease in the mouth, and decay of the teeth, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the place of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The winds of the shoulders cause disease that comes from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The winds of the elbows cause as much harm as three veins of the arm, for they draw blood from these large veins; and commands the physician that he does not prick too much in front, for the bones are bare of flesh, and can be damaged by nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The suction cup that is on the back should be used for diseases of the foundation, and for maladies of dislocation, and it must be a large and made of metal, which can draw well; and by chance, if it is too thin, it will break; and it causes great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The suction cups of the legs are used openly, because they draw blood from all over the body, and are useful for old pains of rheumatism, and marsh fever, and of the bladder, and remove swelling; and they are in the place of the two knees, and everywhere they weaken the body after long use, and cause pain in many positions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The method of applying the suction cup is that you first apply it empty and quickly fill it, then press it firmly and move it evenly, and do not stop doing this until you see the affected area become red and swollen, and the blood clots appear; then, remove the cups, and take care of the body's condition, for there are those who have tender skin and clear pores: if necessary, strike once, and it is necessary to make large wounds, and a few deep ones; and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the skin is thick, then it is necessary to strike twice: the first time to thin the path of the blood clots.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the joint is still very painful, you should strike it a third time; and when we want to pull out the arrow slowly and gradually, we should only do it once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we want to draw out a lot of blood, we should often repeat it; and if the joint is still painful, we should strike it in front, and let the cut be made deeply, which is suitable for those who have thick skin and are strong, and who have sharp points, that you apply the oils of an appetite-stimulating and dissolving: if it is in summer, of violet oil or sweet almond oil or squash seed oil; and if it is in winter, of pennyroyal, lily, camomile, or other similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is large and cold, take oil of amber, or balm, or aniseed oil, and similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the person who has to stretch a wide and large wound, should not put any oil, but it should be washed after the ventilation of hot rosewater, or cold rosewater, or myrtle water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or other similar things.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have much moisture, if they rise from asafetida, or rosewater, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have excessive superfluities rise from old wine, or from vinegar of sour, or from decoction of anise or chamomile, or other similar things; and they should not be washed with a suction device before the bath, but after the bath for one hour or two; and they should not sleep immediately after the enema, and it is good that they move around, when they should be enemaed and when they are enemaed.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And if those who are sick with colic and without are too full and inflamed; then it is good that they take cold things, such as green apples and endives and lettuce at the sauce, and similar things; and mild foods, and mustard of Chastel, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And those who have a cold constitution should take honey syrup, aromatic wine between old and new, and a little juice, and little pinches of peppercorns and peacocks; and the day they want to vomit, they should drink more than they eat; and it is necessary to give some men once in a while a triangular or muscat before vomiting, or after, to strengthen the main members; and it is subtle for the sick, but only those who are chaste should drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The suction cups that are placed on the skin are those that are placed on the liver, and on the spleen, and on the gout, and on the stomach and the belly and the ribs and the hip, for these members do not suffer from being pierced with needles, except to draw blood from one member to another, as we put suction cups on the breasts when the baby is born; to remove the viscosity that is in the member, as we place suction cups on the stomach and on the belly to soften the member; and to remove pain, when there is an abscess or a stone, if by its attractive power it happens to remove the abscess, or to dislodge the stone from its place; and thus it is done when placed on the liver and on the spleen when there is retained viscosity, and these suction cups are administered empty for their sweetness alone; and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes with hot, watery vapor, as in diseases of the chest, and in such a way that one fills the suction cup with hot, boiling water, or with hot water in which herbs have been cooked.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the suction administered by fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And it has two wide and half-palm-sized openings at the front, and has or costitutives around the middle one small hole, as to put a needle, and it is of brass, sulfur before so that it does not burn the hair when putting it on the limb; and it has in the middle a thin rod of brass or iron, to put a candle, and they are large and small according to the diseases and age of those who take them; for the suctions of children are different from those of old people, and thin people are different from fat people.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And one should thus place this suction device on the member: take the candle of wax or the linen cloth, and put it inside the suction device through the rod that is inside the suction device, so that the flame may not burn the hairs; then put it on the member, and one must do so above the blistered spots that we have mentioned, so that when one wants to remove it, one can remove the suction device; and take the linen cloth as before, and restart often, if you have the skill.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the suction device that is administered in the disease of pleurisy, there is no rod or blister; and it is not administered until it is completely flat, and it is placed on the member alone; and this is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Sansues are not indicated for use except in members where one cannot place bandages due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar things; and in similar members, such as ears or nose, and others; and the quality of using sansues is that when you remove sansues that are in high places, such as the eyes, and similar things, take them; and put them in a high place, as long as they are familiar and have nothing in their bellies; and then wash them with blood and bandages, then rub the member until it is red, and put on the sansues; and when they are flat and dry, if it is a part where one can place bandages, place them, for this is very good afterward.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If not, lift the limb from the elbow, and then from the shoulder, very well, and then wipe it; and if the wound is too large after the course of the sinews, then wipe the linen cloth in cold water, and put it on, until the sinew is cleansed; and if the sinew multiplies, then put vitriol shattered glass, or salve, and similar things, until it is cleansed; or you put half of pounded beans on the wound, and leave them until they burn the limb, it will stop now; and if you have more, then take other bandages.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the snakes will not take, rub the wound with fresh blood, or you stick a needle so that the snake bites it, and then put them on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will swell; and when you see that they are about to burst, powder them with a little aloe and ground salt, or with ashes, they will now be ready.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it restores fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Listen, dear child, that the foolish man thinks that this chapter has never been seen in any of the old books, nor have they ever read any letter about it; and for this reason the science is unknown in our land, because I have never found any good one; and I do not know anything, except by the science of the old books, which I have studied so much that I have mastered it, and by experiment, and by the custom of my life; and I have described in this chapter what is contained, and I have abbreviated it at the end, and I have shown clearly the forms of the instruments that will be used, as I have done in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, it is necessary that we say or prologue of this book the summary of the language and the chapters where the wise put their understanding, and dwell on the truth, so that those who are experienced find and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twist or wound comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to clean the wound on both sides, if nothing happens, as weakness of the body, or children, or elders; or if the joint is not very loose, or too stiff; and use sharp remedies, that is to say, sharp remedies, and eye ointment and chicken broth, and do not drink wine, and do not use any heavy meats, and do not fill up too much with food that fills the veins of blood, until you have no doubt of an abscess, or spreading of matter to the member; then the wounds return to their previous government as they have used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that one massage the painful joints that are large and have viscosity, such as cooked wheat in boiling water, and ribs, and tests, and pies, and chicken, and eggs, and fish, and thick wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For the massage, one should avoid making movements that cause pain and the fracture.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And be aware that the broken bones of old people and the decrepit cannot be properly healed or joined according to their nature due to the weakness of the limbs, neither those who are too tender, such as the bones of small children; but instead, one should reset the broken bone above the joint and hold the member together, as it was before; and do not let it rest completely, and for this reason, it is necessary to massage with large pieces of meat, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And the fractures are varied in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there are fractures that go through the bone, and others in soaking, like the point of a pen for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture through a small cut.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And for each kind there is its own method, and its proper tool in the restoration, according to what the memory brings to its mind; and the fracture of the bone is known by the fact that the bone is twisted, and open well by deficiency, and it is to the pressing of the hand; and when there is no tortuosity or it is not to the touch, and the pains are not much, if there is no fracture; but it can still have tortuosity, or cut, or small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	It is not necessary that you move it with your hand, but put on the medicines that come after this, and then gently restrain it now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And if the fracture that was in the armpit, and the two parts are disjointed, you should now put them back together evenly, as if incising an abscess; and if it is hard and comes, do not let any joint remain, until the abscess is calm; then gently and safely place it on the muscle that you can easily and safely move, and if the restoration of this is lighter than the restorations of that where he has pieces, then restrain it as it should be after this.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	If the bone is broken into pieces, if it is a hand or foot, or at your hand if it is small members, or to two cords, or to one cord and at your hand; and put the member according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the member broken are separated, if you can, join them in their proper places with the help that you can, and guard that by your work no harmful injury or pain comes; and well set the two bones according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And if the bone feels not quite right in your hand: if it is well bent, and you do not hold it too tightly, and do not press it as those who bring by their work abscess and contraction to the member, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the member is injured, if you properly restrain the painful part so it does not move, whether awake or asleep, turning or in any other way; and make sure that the member is so secure that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when it feels no pain, it is not yet healed, and you should put it in a position that it feels no pain; and make sure it is properly aligned, so that deformity does not come when it is restored; and the quality of the member broken is according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	The qualities of the member broken are different in size and greatness and form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For there are small members, such as arms and legs and similar ones: if they are thin, cover them with soft linen cloths; and those that are thick, such as the thighs: cover them with a wide and strong bandage, for the wide bands embrace the whole member evenly, and hold it equally in all parts, so that there is no gap; then wrap it around lightly, three or four times according to the size of the member, and hold your hand a little on each side, then go above the fracture and hold it less, than the fracture gradually move away from the fracture; then soften the bandage little by little, until you feel a large part of the healthy flesh, then take another bandage, and return around the other side of the broken bone; then go to the part away from the fracture, and hold it gently, neither too hard nor too firmly, as we have said in the first chapter above; then place between the bandages linen or cloth strips, until they are all even, then tie everything above with a bend, and then put your well-made shoes on top, if there is no abscess or inflammation.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is an abscess or boil, put a soothing ointment on it, and what opens the abscess, and leave it in place for some time; then apply pressure with something sterile, such as half of a wide blade cut cleanly, or wooden splints, or palm leaves, and they should be shaped like this:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	But the sterile strip that one puts over the wound should be slightly larger and wider than the others; and it should also be as long as the limb, whether small or large; then apply pressure with the strips as you did in the first layer, then tie them up evenly, as in the first layer over the break; the tighter the better, but not too much; and it is best if the strings are of medium thickness, neither too thick nor too thin, and they should be made of linen; for if the strings are too thick, as I have seen in some works of the folk who make their own bindings with twisted linen threads, and this is great error, because the bandage cannot be even if it is too fine, and it is best that there be at least one finger's breadth between each strip.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the hairs are pricked by the thorns after straightening them in their proper place, then put some unwoven linen or straw between them so they do not bleed.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with a splint and the bandages are broken, I will tell you the treatment afterwards.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And do not strain all the broken limbs at once on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	Because when the limbs are large, one should not put splints on them until after five or seven days, or more according to your safety from abscess; and get the way of ancient plasters to restore fracture, dislocation, and twist: and take some flour that is kept in the walls of the mill, and mix it with much egg, and put this mixture, not too clear nor too thick, and use it, and it is the common way of the plaster restoring fracture to many positions, and especially to women and small children, because it is not too hard or too rough.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another way of making plaster to heal fractures, dislocations, and twists: take alabaster and lavender and enule and asafetida and Arabic gum and mugwort, each 1 part; myrrh and aloes, each 5 parts; alechil 8 parts; and grind them into a powder, and mix with honey; if the humor of the body is hot, use this plaster, as it is of good composition, and it heals broken bones quickly, and is worth many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another way of making plaster that is good for twists: take mugwort and valerian, each 10 parts; myrrh and aloes, each 8 parts; bolic armenic 10 parts; grind them well and mix with honey or a lot of honey, and administer.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another method of treating joints and bones that have been dislocated from their sockets, and to relieve the pain, and to use the bone and the fracture: take a new leaf, and grind it in oil and cooked oil, and put it on the limb.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	This plaster does not last long, but it is good for relieving abscesses and properly treating pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method of treating broken bones: take dried fig leaves and earth partridge leaves, grind them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another method of treating the fracture of a bone and to alleviate the remaining pain from the abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take root of wormwood, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of each one part; and grind, and mix with wine, and if the limbs are cold, mix with moist or dry coriander powder, and apply.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another method of applying more than the first, when an abscess is difficult to restore the member.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take root of wormwood, linseed, balm, mint, and savory, and flowers of violets and chamomile, from all one part; and grind, and mix with salt powder, or sweet powder, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates said in his book that one should not put above a broken limb for restoring it but rather use a poultice made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and he said that it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems that Galen said that one should put above a broken limb for restoring it, dry things slightly warm, such as myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to apply a poultice that is good for the wound and pain: take mallows and horsehair, or feathers of an owl, and viscum, and seal equally, and grind them, and make a poultice and apply it to the wound.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then, release it a little later, and be careful if the hairs do not feel any pain, or if they do not move the bones of their joint; then do not release it by force again. If pain comes to the limb, or pruritus, without rest or inflammation, quickly release it, and remove the plaster now; and take a light bandage, and moisten with sea water, and pour in hot, and raise the limb, until the pruritus ceases, and soothe the pain; then let the member rest for an hour, then put on dry linen, moistened with hot or rose oil, and tie up with a nut, as long as you are sure of no abscess forming; and relieve the inflammation of the limb, and soothe the pain, then start the subtle bandage again, and a little bit of plaster, and do not strain it too much as before; subtly until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that an abscess has pus and redness and pain and swelling, and you have the skill of plastering and of bandaging, if it restarts, as you did previously evenly.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	And if it does not come to the limb any of what we have said, then do not remove it for three days or four or five or seven; and never leave it twenty days, as long as the breaker is still present, and approach the bandaging of the char above; then it holds more than previously, and increases its flesh, as I have said before; and if you see that the limb becomes dry more than what is necessary, then rub it with hot, sharp tea every time you remove it, and this should be every day, and loosen a little bit of the bandage; by this method, therefore, it cures the necrosis in the limb, and quickly repairs what the foolish ones do, which torture the member: it is bad, and if these are not done carefully, and I see no other thing than the worsening and the wrong doing.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various ways of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	Many ways of breaking are, and diverse figures, and the causes are distinguished; for there are breaks that are made by percussion of the spear, and the collarbone fractures the entire bone just below the shoulder, as is done with a hatch or a fust; and because of this, this type of break is called «hatchure».
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	Or the spear pierces the bone from above, perforating it, and this type of break is called «absolute»; and the wound of these two breaks is great or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is percussion embedded, or a cut from the edge of the spear, or from falling on the stone, or similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	If he has a fracture that pierces through, approaching the thread that is outside the bone, or above the bone, and this wound is large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if the wound is healed into the bone as subtly as a hair, and the fracture is small, and for this reason it is called this "capillary" fracture; and if the wound is made by being hit by an arrow, or by falling, or by something similar, and the piece of the bone goes down below, and the threads are like those that they make in a cauldron when they hammer on them; then the arrow goes inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And there are those who have more than just moist bones, such as a child's skull; and they have all these methods of breaking, so that small pieces are removed like these; and I will speak about this in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all methods of breaking by the removal above them, and the inquiry with tents, and the rotten charcoal that is above.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The similarity of hair is known because when one has exposed the bone, and one rubs it above, if there is an open black breakage.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of the breakage, be careful of accidents of pain, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, and loss of understanding, and extension, and paralysis, and fever ague, and the eyes issuing forth and reddening, and other similar things in many dispositions, it cannot be healed without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see any obvious injury, and you hope for recovery, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the newborn first comes to you, and it is breech, then you must remove the bone in front of the fourth joint that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in the feet, then you must remove the bone in front of the seventh joint, provided that the tissue around the bone is rotten, and the injuries that we have mentioned occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the broken piece of the bone comes close to the tissue covering the brain, then you must cut away the part that is injured in the following way: and it is that you grip the tip of the painful horn, and uncover the bone in all the ways that you can, and over the shape of the wound as softly as you can, and if blood comes out when revealing the bone, or an abscess forms, help as necessary, and it is that you fill the wound with moist cloths in rose oil; and let the wound rest until the abscess is soothed, and be sure that blood does not come out; then begin around the bone to remove, and this is done according to the two methods of work: one method is that you cut tightly against the incision, and this is the form.
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	Then make another cut larger than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And in the second manner, you should have many different cuts, some narrow and others wide, and they should be sharp and made of iron inde; and work lightly, so as not to wound the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And if the tooth is hard and out of position, it is necessary that you drill around it, as long as you administer cuts with tarires, not piercing through the bone, and should have above the point a margin or circle, which does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone; and you should have many, so that each one comes in its own place of the bone, so that you have tarires for all bones; and this is the form of the three ways of cutting.
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The qualities for perforating around the broken bone are that you place the needle against the bone and turn to your right until you feel that the bone is perforated; then remove the needle in another part a little later, and so do all around, then cover the incisions the space of the bone that is between the bones, and do it more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you take the bone in your hand, or to any of the instruments that you have like forceps, pliers; and beware that you do not touch the brain or the spine.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have perforated and treated the bone, it is advisable to close the opening that remains of the bone with another instrument similar to a needle, but it must be more flexible and more subtle than the other needle; and if there remain any small bones or scales, remove them gently with the instruments; then treat the wound with tents and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other method of work is that which the Greeks call, which is much safer; and it is very effective, and this is their word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is first necessary that you dissect a part of the bone, where the break is open and visible, so that when you have exposed that part, you can insert the lens-shaped piece from this incision, which is the form:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one part, and the piece is in two parts, so that the cutter is against the bone; then strike with a small hammer from above, so that you lightly cut the bone all around, and be careful of the thread that is outside; if it is against the bone, lightly cut the bone, because it is done well without harm, and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone's fracture does not pierce through the skin, and the bone is only broken from above, and there are small pieces, then you should smooth that roughness, and remove scales with the delicate scraper that you should have various quantities of, to manage each limb in the most convenient way, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If there are large scrapers first, and then more delicate ones, and do not stop doing this until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other hair-cutting and delicate fracture scrappers, it is recommended that you manage according to its advancement; and this is a thing that is not repeated to him who has put his study in this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	If the wound is exposed, it is necessary to place a cloth of linen according to the size of the wound, soak it in rose oil, and place it on the wound; then take another cloth doubled into two or three, soak it in wine and rose oil, and place it on top of the first cloth; do this more gently than you can bear, so as not to irritate the wound, then administer by pouring over another liquid, and do not strain it until it has stained the wound only; leave it in this way for one or two days, until the abscess is calm, then remove it, and administer medicines such as lily roots, flour of gum, powder of frankincense, aristolochia, and similar things; make a powder from these things and place it on the wound, and administer liquid medicines without biting; keep the wound clean, do not leave any ointment on it, or any bandage, for when bandages are placed on the brain, they cause headaches and great pain.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	If no accidents come to the limb, as we have said, it is uncertain without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there is no other cause than the medicine that was placed on it, which has such virtue, then you must apply a part of honey, and three parts of red oil and a cloth, and put it on the wound; then cure the wound in the manner of curing until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	It is said that the two bones above the nose are never broken, or one at a time, because they are cartilaginous and do not break easily, unless it is bent or twisted, and then it heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, it is necessary that you beat your small nail or puncture the skin, and place the broken part inside your index finger, and in the palm by default, until the bone regains its natural shape; and do this lightly, and keep in mind that the hairs do not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the broken part is in the upper part of the bone, and cannot reach your finger, it is necessary that you place it on the head of a pin or a slightly thick one.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the broken part is from both parts, rebuild the other and hasten to restore the first joint, if you can; if not, after the seventh or eighth day, when the swelling of the wound is calmed, then beat at the head of the bone with pieces of linen cloth, if the broken part is in one piece.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Where you place the other side, if the fracture is there; and if the tentacles are so large that they fill the nostrils.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And they said no one should moisten the tentacles in the morning and evening.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	It does not seem to me that this is correct, but it should be moistened with a bandage of egg yolk and powdered millet; then leave the tentacle until the bone is hard, and the cartilages are hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And never use goose feathers in place of tentacles, and if the sore is covered with a bandage, and if the fracture is held, and blows the bad air away; now do what you see.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if an abscess comes to the nose while you work, put cotton or milled cloth soaked in rose oil or a drop of diachylon on it.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess does not come to the nose, put a plaster on it made of mustard flour and powdered incense, mixed with egg yolk, then place light cloths over it and do not tie the nose tightly; and if the broken part of the nose is small and in many pieces, use suitable instruments to remove them, then cut the wound, and the care of things embedded inside, and sew, as suitable emplastres and ointments, and if there is no wound inside the nose, treat it with tents, and put on bandages until it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	of the fracture of the mandible
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the mandible is fractured, and there is no wound elsewhere, and the break is only slight, and is not broken into two pieces, because of the teeth inside, if one knows it lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the break is in the right part, you should push your second index finger into the mouth of the patient; and if the break is in the left mandible, push your second index finger from your right hand, and push the break inside lightly, and hold it to the other hand by default, and make even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the break of the mandible is severed in two, then it is necessary that you administer traction of II parts, until it is even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if the teeth are moved or broken, bind them with a gold, silver, or silk thread, then place them on the broken jawbone, and place a double cloth over it; and place on the cloth a large, well-made splint, or a piece of evenly cut leather, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it securely with whatever you can, and command the patient to rest and eat light food.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	And if you see that the shape changes, remove it from the wound and then put it back in its place; and apply a poultice on it, of flour from the mill with abundant oil or semolina flour, after you have removed the splinter; and place the poultice over the poultice, and if the poultice becomes hard, leave it until it is healed; often it is healed in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if abscesses come, then follow what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is both a fracture and a wound together, treat each piece of the bone separately; carefully remove the bone with tools appropriate for this.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, then enlarge it according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces and there is no more left, then dress the wound, if it is wide, and apply appropriate ointments to it, in order to stop bleeding until it is healed.
de la forcele	of the forearm
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The forearm breaks several times in front of and behind the shoulder, and the fracture is in three ways: either it is broken and dislocated in two, and there are pieces, and it is the least heavy to restore; or there is a break with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And if the work is regarding the fracture with a wound, then you should have two assistants, so that one of them tends to the injury where the forearm is broken; and the other extends the neck towards the affected part; then set the fracture to your hand, so that it forms as it should be, and there is no appearance or movement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you have the task of extending further, place a rounded cushion of cloth or linen, according to your need, under the shoulder against the pain; and stretch and relieve the tension, and hold the cushion in your hand, so that you can make it even with the fracture, as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the chief of the shoulder upwards, because it comes out, then it is necessary to press the painful part gently on its own, and place a pillow under the shoulder against the ear, and support the shoulder below, until the bone of the shoulder is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then apply the fracture to your own, and if you find the broken pieces, it is necessary that you cut through; and carefully carve the pieces lightly, and if the bone cannot be joined for any reason, use one of the instruments you have; but put the forceps of this instrument away to prevent the wound from opening.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And it seems like a spoon, and not too sharp, and also as wide as it needs to be, according to the size of the bone and the skill of the work; and have two needles, as you see, and one is wide and the other is thin, like the tear in the wound that you made when you cut the bones; and when you are sure of an abscess, clean the wound, and if the tear is small, or you doubt an abscess, use a cloth and tents according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	If an abscess occurs, if it bursts, then rub the cloth in rose oil and vinegar and wine, and put it on.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The reduction of the bone, when it is painful and swollen, is that you place the plaster of the mill flour and some egg on the bone, and put it on. Then take a very large bandage of one palm in width, then place the cloth double over the light dressing and the plaster; then take a subtle staff of three spans in width and length, and wrap it around the bandage so that the head of the bandage hangs down; and place the staff on the fracture, and turn the bandage over the neck, and remove the staff from the fracture soundly, and from the fracture painfully; and splint each part, and when you see that the bandage holds the fracture evenly, and you see clearly that the staff does not move above the broken bone, then reward it every day, and when the bandage is released, restrain it; and make the patient lie on his back, and place what little oil is left from the fracture on the shoulder to raise the dislocation; align the fracture by aligning the shoulder, or you bind the arm to the neck, and do not loosen it if no evil accidents come, for at least 20 days; then continue with the plaster, if you see that there is a need for it, and strain and leave it thus until it is restored; and it is restored in at most 28 days, and less to some men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the shoulder fracture
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	It rarely happens that the shoulder breaks or moves out of place in the middle, and it is not known except by touch; then according to the figure of the fracture, and the bone is reset according to its natural shape, in all ways that you can; then put powder from the mill with abundant vinegar on the limb, and light bandages, and place a double layer of cloth over it; then place a wide and thin splint, slightly wider than the shoulder, and if the splint is not in any part of the shoulder, then use a strip of linen to evenly cover the splint; and then firmly wrap a large bandage around it so that the splint does not move from its place, and watch for each day; and every time it breaks, re-wrap and keep it even if it is out of place, and press the painful parts on its side; and the shoulder is restored in 20 or 25 days, and when these numbers are completed, then remove it, and be careful, for this is not bone that can be set firmly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone is exposed before the fracture, and not removed from the wound, then make an incision, and the bone, and do as we have said in the breaking of the finger to relieve abscess pain.
de la brisure dou pis	of the breaking of the finger
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The fingers are never broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; but they often break at the end.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, it declines outwards, and the patient feels great pain, and lacks movement, and everything, and perhaps vomiting of blood, and an open wound in the broken bone, and the patient feels all is not well.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that the hairs are laid flat on their backs, and the bone is placed between the shoulder blades, then press the shoulders, and gather the ribs of both sides in your hands, and subtly put them even in all the ways you can, until the figure of the bone is as it should be; then place bandages and poultices on top of the thin bone of salt, or another light one, and wrap it in a cloth, and tie it to the broken bone so it does not move; then gently round the backbone again, and gradually tighten, and warm every hour with the book, and if it relaxes, then tighten; and if it is necessary to loosen, for corrosion or for itching that comes to the skin, or pain or abscess, then hurry, and loosen, and remove the bandage, and address what has come from the ways of healing; then reapply the bandage, and tighten until it is healthy.
de la brisure des costes	of rib fractures
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	of rib fractures that only come from heavy blows to the back and at the neck, and they only break because of their sharpness; and one feels them well during an examination.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the treatment is that you set the fracture as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	Then apply the plaster and bandage it with a splint if you know how to do it.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the rib fracture is leaning inwards, it causes great pain and tenderness, as if from pleurisy, because the ribs press on the lungs; and the breathing is shallow, and there is a lot of blood, and this is a difficult sickness, and the ancients had much concern about it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if among those who say that it should be administered foods that swell the stomach, to push the broken bone into place.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not make this mistake, that ulcers do not come, if they have not come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if they have come, then the healthy.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they say that some put suction cups on the limb, for sweating well, and this is reasonable; however, doubt arises because the suction cup does not attract the excess from the limb due to its weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say that some should cover the limb with a thin layer of oil, and then put tents between the ribs to even out the lung inside, then treat the cure of pleurisy, food, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the pain is great that they cannot bear it through the bone that does not pierce the skin, and there is doubt, then one must cut across the rib on the side broken, and one must put a tool to guard the wound; and then one must break the bone, and lightly pull it out, and then one must suture the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and treat them with plasters, until they are healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess appears on the skin, put moistened linen cloths on it in rose oil, and put on the limb; and treat while the limb is lying down nearby, where it should be, until it is healed.
de la brisure dou col	of the broken neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Never comes a breaker of the broken neck, and seldom do they cause pain; and so with the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to anyone, and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, if you see their hands softened and swollen and dead, and they cannot move or extend them, and when you pinch them with a needle, they do not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	It is often fatal in many conditions, and if they move and feel well when you stretch them and not, then it means that the joint of the bone is saved, and the pain is cured, if they are treated.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if a similar thing comes to the spine of the back, and you know whether it is healthy or not, if you take note of whether the feet are soft, and if the accidents that are in the hands are present, and there is a sensation of ventosities and egestion without volition; and when it is placed on its belly, if there is egestion without volition.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when it is placed on its back and it wants to sit up, it cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	It is fatal: do not labor in its care.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come to it, the thing is more light.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is that you reward if there is an abscess, apply rose oil or oil of mother of pearl on the spine until it is calmed; then apply one of the healing plasters and drying, and bind it with a bandage, and command the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where it hurts, until it is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is dry, it is necessary to cover it with cloth; then remove the bone, then assemble the two edges of the wound, if it is large, at a seam, then treat the wound with char, as long as it is healed; and if the bone is broken, which is called the "broken bone", if you have a pouch in your right hand, put it on your left hand to your power, then put the plaster and the bandage on, if you know how; then tighten, and if there is dry bone, do it again, and remove, and treat the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the break of the bone of the shoulder
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	There is not much that the bone of the shoulder can be broken, and if it does, it does not have a great effect on the head; and making it long, and declining to the parched place, and coming to the pain in the limb, and pointing, and swelling as it breaks.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand over it, as long as you are over the broken part; and you cut away those parts of the break and its shape; and if the break is only at the top, then set it straight until it is in its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long, or it declines to the inside, then make the patient lie on their belly, until the restoration of this fracture is complete.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have set it straight, place the plaster on it, then place a splint of wood or bone, and hold the broken part, so that it does not move; and apply the limb outside the ribs, until it is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on their good side, or on their back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if an abscess comes, do not touch it, until the abscess is relieved, and place what we have said before; then return to restoration, and hold it as it should be, if there is no bad accident; and this is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the shoulder dislocation
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder joint is located between the neck and the top of the shoulder, and if it is broken, one should restore it according to one of the two methods: one of which is that you take a smooth piece of bone, according to this form:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie the two broken pieces together, and raise them up, and saw the painful part above the seat; then pour some arm bone broth over the broken piece, until it becomes easy to move, and have a hook of bone, then place something heavy or the assistant extends it below; then put the mired fragment equal to its hands together, until the broken person returns as it should be.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other way is that one should pull the dislocated part over its socket, then command two ministers that one ties what is above the broken part to his hands, and the other ties outside of everything, and stretches each to its part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is outside, then hold the rope outside of the broken part, above the broken part, and stretch each minister to its part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the broken part is near the neck of the shoulder, then you should place the rope outside of the acromion, and the other towards the back, outside of the broken part; and similarly, if the broken part is towards the back, then you should gently pull, without labor, until the broken part is even with the shoulder, and with the back; then level the break, as it should be, and pull, if there are no apoplectic strokes.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	If an abscess comes and it is not held still for seven days, and put in a poultice of milk and rose oil, until the abscess is soothed; then hold still, and the way to hold still is that you place the bandage on the broken part, then bring the arm up to the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the chest; and put the dressing, and hold still on the shoulder, and on the arm, so that the arm is in its place, if nothing prevents it, or the bone does not move.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use splints, and place a wider and stronger splint than the others over the fracture, and have two inches of space between each splint, and let each splint be so large that it passes the fracture three fingers on each side; then strain over the splints, as I said at the beginning of this chapter over the fracture, more strongly and less distant.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the position of the splints and the straining, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the abscess has not opened, let it remain bound for seven days, as we have said; then examine the wound every three days, that it does not become inflamed or swell, or that the pus does not come to the limb because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the shoulder, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such accidents occur, as we have said, for three days or more, and the pain lies on his back, and his hands are on his stomach; and he removes the aid from the shoulder with a plain cloth evenly, and looks every hour of the day or night, that the shape of the member does not move, or that the ligaments are not softened; then the shoulder recovers by the power of medicine, and give him the food we have put before, in a similar way that the food is at the first subtle; and when he begins to regain, it should be thick.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	It is customary that the shoulder and leg should be reset in forty hours after everything; and then one should remove and administer a bath and medicines of warmth for the limb to heal.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the structure is ugly and swollen, it may take two months or more to reset.
de la brisure du bras	of the broken arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the forearm, of which one is small and is called the little bone; it is this one that contains the wrist; and the other is large and is called the great bone, which is on the outside, next to the little one; perhaps only the great bone breaks, or the small one, and perhaps both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small bones are broken, the restoration is light, and the healing; and when the large bones are broken, the healing is difficult, and more painful than when they are broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If the small bones are broken alone, then it is best to extend them slightly and align them evenly.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if the large bones are broken, then it is best to strain them more forcefully; and extend them over the cushion, and tie the handkerchief higher than the other fingers, and the small fingers lower than the others, and let the hairs cross each other above themselves, and the cushion in front of him higher, so that the hairs do not suffer any labor; then extend the ministers some of his arm to the part outside of his hand, or to the side, and other ministers on top.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then place the mirrors evenly, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if it breaks into pieces, put each in its place, and if there is no need to hold the cure, and you cannot restore it to its place, then do as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the breaker there is a wound, I have spoken to the surgeon about it; take care of it.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if in the beginning of restoration there is an abscess, then use the poultice made of red rose oil and white wax, which is not too hard or too soft; and bind the poultice gently, until the abscess is soothed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	Then remove the splint, and apply the powder from the mill with plenty of urine, then place the splints, and make sure the splint of the broken part is slightly outside and a bit larger than the others; and it should have six splints or more in various positions: whether the broken part is in one bone or two; and hold it above the broken part and less distant from the other side, as I said at the beginning of this chapter; and let the cloths that are on the broken part be soft and moist, and not too hard or sharp; and let the thread, which is holding the broken part together, be made of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	Reward the member and the limb after some time.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any accident comes to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, then you must raise the limb in hot water, until those itching are soothed; and leave the limb to rest without being tightly bound.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	Then begin the strapping again, and if the limb is broken and the bones are decayed, and similar things, then apply it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the swelling cannot come to the limb because it is too tight, then you must slightly loosen it, and leave it thus for some time, until the swelling has gone, and then strap it again.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things we have said do not cause harm, then let them remain for twenty days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	And if it is broken, then let the hands be placed on his neck, and let his neck be straight, and avoid movement and stretching, and sleep on his back; and know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or thirty-five, and perhaps in twenty days, according to the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the broken hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that at the back of the hand and to us there are few fractures, and it only happens many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	And when the bone of the hand is broken or crushed, it is necessary that the hairs be cut short and straight; then place your hand on the flat surface, and extend the healer's bones, and put them evenly in their places, until they are well joined; then apply the plaster and bandages, if there are no abscesses, then put a splint according to the size of the limb; and let it be wrapped in a linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the broken bone is in the back of the palm of the hand, then make a ball of cloth, and instruct the patient to hold it against their broken hand; then wrap it with a long piece of cloth, and put the splint as wide as the palm of the hand, and apply it as it should be.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is on the outside, it is necessary to place a splint above and another below in the palm, so that the hand is open and straight, then bind it all around the hand, and stanch the blood between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fractured bone comes to one of the two, whether it is a pouch, then set it evenly as it should be; and bind it with the palm, and if you see that you can set it straight without moving; and if the fracture is in other fingers, such as the index or another, then set it evenly, and bind it with the uninjured finger next to it; or you can bind them all together, holding them, which is better, or you can put a splint on top, as you would for a pouch; and take care in restoration and disposition of abscess, and treat what comes to it, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken ribs
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	The ribs of the ribcage are often broken, and one can see it when they return in front and behind; and the restoration is by tying the two ends of the broken rib together.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the hairs are cut off from their face, then each minister stretches their part evenly; and this is when the break is placed in the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the break is close to the root of the ribcage, then one of the ends of the rib should be towards the knuckle, and the other ends away from the broken rib.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if it is close to the groin, and then the ligaments above the groin are stretched, and the extension is down; then place the bone even in both hands, according to its natural shape, and then apply the plaster, and the bandage, and there are no abscesses.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is an abscess, let it subside first, then return to your work and treatment; the bandage is made in this way.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary to wrap it above the fracture with a double or triple layer, and let the excess hang down, then turn the leg until the heel comes to the root of the foot, and tie a long piece of cloth between the calf and the leg, outside the groin, and bring the upper end of the cloth up; then turn back over the leg and the calf, tie the bandage, place the splint on top of the leg bone; then fill the space between the leg and the calf with soft cloth to even out the pressure, then begin to bind three or four times above the fracture; and the more you go up from the fracture, the less you should strain it; then examine the two ends of the cloth that you have tied between the leg and the calf, and the three splints above, then return to the top of the cloth, until you reach the knee; and if it does not move from its place, then leave it like that, so that there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it is dislocated, then reset it, and address what comes out, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of the bone that can be felt, then it should be set, if possible; and if not, then it must be broken and traction applied; and the cure is as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And never break the spine in such a way that one puts these bones together, as in dislocation and the arm; however, in restoring it in this way does not hurt the joints.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And one should remove the spine at the time it is restored, a little less or a little more, according to the differences in constitutions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the road of the groin
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	There are few breaks in the road of the groin, but it often causes pain.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, it is only a cut or a puncture, and it causes all wounds, both open and closed, and it feels very bad.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is done by straightening what is twisted to its proper position, as much as possible; then apply the poultice, and if you have skill, place a round bandage, and hold it in place as it should be, then warm all the preparations that we have mentioned for other breaks, such as abscesses and similar things; for each accident, put what is appropriate, until it is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the broken leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	It is said that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is called "mustelz" by the right, and the other is called "foscile"; and it breaks in the same way as the arm, and for this reason the restoration is the same as that of the arm equally, and the work is all there. And if both bones are broken at once, then the leg returns to its whole form.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the "mustelz" bone is broken, it heals in front.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the "foscile" bone is broken, it causes great pain and can be seen well; and it heals outside.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Therefore, apply gentle extension, and make it even, and tie the tendons equally; but if the fracture is sharp and there are many pieces, then the extension should be less and lighter; and treat according to your virtue.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you have completed your work, take two strips of cloth that reinforce the leg on one side and the other, and are long enough to cover from the knee to the ankle; then wrap them around and tie them above and below, and in the middle as well, so that the leg cannot bend to the left or right, and it is well; and no one administers the long cloth of the leg, and it is made of flax, and properly placed on the fracture where it is sore; and move the leg every day to see if there is an abscess or other accident; if the cure is as soon as it is healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the breaking of bones due to pigeon
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle, there is no breaking of bones, but in the case of pigeon bones, there is never any breaking and it is a minor injury, and there has only been reported one case of fracture in more positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there is breaking of pigeon bones, and you see these bones stacked on top of each other, as if they were walking, then place the injured foot on the ground, as if it were walking, then place your foot on the place where the bones are raised, then press them until they return to their original position; then apply the ointment and wash with water, and put a small cloth under the belly of the pigeon, then bandage the leg evenly, then wrap bandages around it, and other things that you know how to do.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, if the joint is released, you will find the bones even, whether they are broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	If there are any of the two broken, if you reset them as we have said for the two bones of the hand; then place a splint along the length of the bone, and it should be slightly wider, then place the bandage below the pierced point as I have said, and wrap it gently; and if there are two or three, or more, broken, place a splint above each according to its quantity, wrapped in a linen cloth, and place the bandage below the pierced point; and let it be above the head of the bone beneath the belly of the wound, so that it tinges well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you must not forget the other things that I have said about other breakages, as we have said; and treat each accident according to how it should be treated.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the breaking of the bone of the thumb
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bones of the woman are broken, if the flesh is enlarged, then incline it to the back part, and hold it from behind; then fill the wound with cotton, and put in as much as before; then lift the woman, and gently raise her back and forth, and gradually remove the cotton until it reaches the entrance of the nature, and the bone returns with the cotton; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, return it, and do this for seven days or around: then the breakage will be restored, and if you see, take a catheter and tie a piece of gauze to it, and blow all the gauze into the nature; then blow into the catheter forming, until the gauze is inflated inside: the nature will restore the breakage; then fill it with cotton, and leave it in this way for some time, until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the tooth of the little finger of the hand is broken, or of the woman, if it is reset as we have said in the bone of the shoulder; and these fractures are not hidden to him who puts his study and his use to this book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the fracture means in many positions the right way of restoration: understand therefore.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the bone, when it is broken, take a goose quill and blow the bone; then wrap it in cloths, and leave it for three days or so, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	of fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for the one who has broken with a wound, even if it is large, such as the bones of the ribs or shoulder or similar, that they be cleansed immediately, so that the cleansings that we have said bear witness.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is clean, if the remainder of vitriol, if you have no other thing, then begin to restore the broken one in the same hour, or the next day, before it sets.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if it sets before the next day, then leave the restoration until the new day, as long as the setting is not eased, and do not touch it on the next day or the fourth, for you will bring about bad accidents.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken jaw appears to be displaced upwards, then it is necessary that you gently place your fingers on it, extending it slightly.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension does not match your hands, then use the tool made of iron, which is seven or eight times longer than the injury; and its width depends on the size of the wound. And for this reason, the mirror should have three or four eyes, according to the amount of each fracture; and it should be round and a bit thick, so that it does not break under compression on your work, and it should be sharp in front and thick in the middle, like this:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called "palainche", because the patient should have the broken bone placed on top of the head of the visible bone; and it is nailed once, as much as it can be, and they are evenly aligned one against the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is slight, and the instruments cannot well take the bone, then you must cut the head of the bone, as much as they have the ability to do so.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot bring the bone back, as we have said, then use an appropriate instrument, such as a saw or chisel, to your ability; then shave off what remains in the bone of roughness and small scars.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is returned, and the pain is great afterwards, do not let it stay in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	If you do not let it stay in its natural place for too long, then clean the wound with black stiptic wine, and properly if it has been open; and do not put anything on the wound or where there is oil, so that it does not bring pus and corruption; then administer these things as you have restored the bone, and leave the wound exposed, and cover the covering all around, according to the size of the wound, and be careful that the wound is not squeezed with the breakage; many times this has been done by fools, and they have brought pus or death or corrosion at any time; and let the most gentle and softest things be used for other breaks.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that no harmful event has occurred, as we have said, and you relieve pain to the limb, then do not place it above; but wrap around, in place of stitches, hard cloths, and bind them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days that the wound is beginning to close, remove what you had placed above it all, and put on healing ointment, such as Triple Antibiotic Ointment and similar.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you move the limb twice a day, in the morning and in the evening, as long as it is sound and healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the member be aligned in such a way that the bow goes straight up lightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if they continue to break, and it cannot be fixed but keeps breaking the bow, because there are small pieces of bone, therefore it is necessary that you wash the wound with a tent, and remove all those unnecessary pieces that cause that pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula comes to the limb, or in another way of corruption, then it is necessary that you treat it, according to what it says in its chapter before.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken and open on the limb, like the bones of the thigh or shoulder, and other similar large members, do not remove it, because many times death comes, but leave it until it can heal; perhaps it will fall out after twenty or thirty days, then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of the sudden which come to the soldering
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We often come after the health of the broken bone, especially when it is near the joint, and the unfortunate thing is to see the shape of the limb; and by chance cannot do the limbs its natural works.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Therefore take care if it is fresh: if you administer stanching medicines, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocollis, acacia, and similar things, so that you do not use any of these or all together, and mix with stanching wine or abundant oil or vinegar; and put it on the nose in a cloth, and hold it firmly, and do not let it out in the hand for a while; then remove it, and start another, until the swelling is gone; or you hold a piece of bread well made; because the property of the bread is that it removes all swellings above the limbs; and if the swelling is already hard like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, if the cover is on top, and make the excess apparent; or you cut it with any razor, until it is removed, and care until it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	a weak limb that is weakened after the injury
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone is restored, and it remains weak and thin afterward, this can be due to many causes: because it was too tightly bound, and was not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many bindings, and could not come to the proper alignment of the limb; or because of too much swelling; or because of too large movements, not in its hour; or because it has little blood in its body, it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the pain less, and make the body tense, until the swelling is not multiplied in it; and administer baths, and give joy and rest; then put poultice on the limb, so that the poultice attracts to the great alignment, and the inflammation often of high heat, until the alignment comes to the limb; and returns to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	A dislocated limb after healing
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after healing, and the bones are broken open, and the shape of the limb is deformed, it does not matter if its original appearance is lost: thus one should not believe those who say that the limb must be broken all over again, and many have done this in our land; and such practices are blamed, and great harms come from it, and perhaps death; however, if the fractures and twists are fresh, it is necessary to apply hot water or softening herbs that are boiled, such as willow bark, roots, and marshmallow, and similar things; and the mollifying plaster, such as good-quality honey, and you take the muscavend powder of willow bark, and mix it with goose grease or sesame oil, and make a plaster on top; or you take figs, and grind them with flour of coltsfoot, and similar medicines that soothe the pain.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And never is the joint frozen due to continuous and prolonged rubbing with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And you should move the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the tortuosity is awakened and hardened, as with a stone, and it needs to be frozen with ice, if it is necessary to cover it with the bone, with a slight and delicate incision; and put on a bandage and rest in treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocations occur when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to none, it must now be brought back towards the shoulder.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if it is delayed, the shoulder swells, and if by chance it is reset, it may move in the wrong direction: many times it causes spasms and other pains; therefore, when this happens, first treat the injury, then let the limb rest until the abscess is calmed; then raise the member with hot and oil, then gently reset it, and care for each member as it comes back to its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on the dislocations of the shoulder joint from the neck downwards.
des mandibules	of the mandibles
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	It rarely happens that the mandibles are dislocated and the dislocations of them occur in two ways: either they are slightly misaligned from their place and slightly softened; or they are completely displaced, hanging downwards, and tear the saliva from the mouth so that it cannot hold it, nor can it close its mouth, and it covers its tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns to its place in many positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is completely and accomplished, then you must quickly reset it, and do not delay; and in such a way that the healer pours the painful part of the dislocation into a small bowl of one of its hands at the root of the mandible inside the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts; and the other hand is outside, to hold even; and commands the patient to soften, his mandibles, and move them from all sides.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And when the dislocated joint is evened out, it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if it is painful to reset, especially when both mandibles are together, and the joints are heated with hot oil and oil, do not delay in resetting, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are evened out and the jaw with pain is closed properly to soften, place a cloth moistened in a cerote made of red oil and wax over it, then tie it lightly with soft bands; let the patient lie on their back, and their heads between two cushions, so that they do not move to the right or left, nor make any effort to move, but take light food, until the pain is gone, and the jaws are healed; then change what they want lightly, and do not force them to open their mouth for eating and drinking, until the jaw is well healed and healthy.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two mandibles cannot be reset to their proper position within an hour, and they are not converted back to their original shape, then fevers and sores may occur, and possibly diarrhea, and perhaps vomiting of pure bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	And when you see this, then it is certain death; and often those who have had this die within fourteen days.
de la forcelle	of the forearm
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The forearm cannot be dislocated from the side of the body without the use of force, and it is not reset once displaced, and one can feel it clearly.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is such that the patient should lie on their back, and extend their arms; then press the joint firmly with your palm, and it will return; then apply the plaster and bandage, and secure it; if the patient cannot be dislocated, and if it does not reset, then reset the joint as we have described; then apply the plaster and bandage, and secure it, and command the patient to rest until they are healed; and thus the same is done for the shoulder, when it is released from its joint.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	There are three ways in which the shoulder can dislocate: one is that it dislocates to the side of the armpit; the second is to the back; and thirdly, it dislocates above, but this happens rarely; and it does not dislocate behind the shoulder, nor inside through the nerves; and many times it dislocates to the side, especially to those who have little flesh, for to these it must be done harshly; to those who have enough flesh, it must be done gently, and returned gently.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes happens to some men, hammering or crushing, and inflames the shoulder with an abscess, and thinks it is dislocated by this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	Therefore, you must examine him, until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And it is known that the dislocation is when it is turned towards the shoulder, and sets apart the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between their differences manifest; and you will find at the top of the shoulder a hollow, and below the shoulder, the top of the shoulder, as if it were a bone; and the evil cannot bring its hand to its neck, nor move from any movements; and also, if it is dislocated high, if it is not hidden, because you will see it manifestly at the back; and this manner of dislocation is only to be returned, when it is new, or if the evil is painful.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the method is that the healers gently lift the bad joint up, then place their fingers below the joint, and push the joint back into place from above; and the healers gently lift and extend the arm upwards, then put it back down; it will quickly return.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come back as we have said, then it is necessary that the bad joint be soaked in hot water; and the healer applies a warming and soothing lotion, such as a decoction of aloe, fenugreek, and melilot in hot water, and it is applied; then the bad joint is placed on its back, and a cloth of even linen, neither too soft nor too hard, is placed below the joint, then the foot of the injured person is placed on the cloth, and the healer gently lifts the shoulder joint; another healer wets the head of the bad joint, so that it does not move downwards; this shoulder is now completely back in place, and you must make sure that the person who is helping is larger than the bad joint; and they should be standing to the side of the body, and pulling the shoulder away from the bad joint, and lifting the joint upwards, so that the bad joint hangs in the air; and another healer takes the hand of the injured person down towards their stomach.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	If the pain is too light, nothing heavy can be done with it, and the dislocation now returns.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And the resetting is done in another way: and it is that one places a long, thin twig in the earth, which the patient should also hold like a pistol, but not too heavy or too rough; then it is placed away from the painful part, but with a soft cloth over it, and the joint should be stretched out along the length of the bast; then the hand is placed on the other side firmly, and the joint will return to its place quickly; and if it does not return for all these things that we have said, then do this cure: take a twig of two arms in width and four fingers in height, which has the head rounded to enter into the mouth from outside the jaw, like this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then tie a soft cloth above the injured shoulder, which was not bleeding, then remove it from the painful area; extend one arm over the long one, and tie the dislocation on the long arm, and the hand at the head of the hand, then put the arm over the broad end of an arrow, and stretch the hand down, and leave the body hanging on the other side: the joint is now healed.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when she is healed in any way, it is necessary to place a soft cloth of equal linen over the shoulder, then apply the poultice with powder from the mill, with incense and some honey, over the entire shoulder and around, then remove the poultice from the shoulder evenly, and return the limb to the poultice, and embrace the hand at the neck, and let the hands remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he move it little, until the limb is comfortable, for it will heal faster; then move it more after four or seven days, and if it is stiff and does not become soft, it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is strong and has come out due to moisture or for another reason, it is necessary that you administer cauteries at three points, as it is placed before or in the chapter on cauteries.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all of this, and it dislocates again after seven days, and the joint does not stay in place, and cannot be raised above the arm, then cut or stretch or soften the nerve at the head of the shoulder; and cut or stretch or soften the joint so that it never returns to its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that is above the knees and the buttocks, or below, is caused by impulse and stretching of the hands, and it is treated with another oil; and it is cured until it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing the limb becomes stiff and moves slowly, then use the hairs many times in a bath until the stiffness is alleviated, and it returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	That the joint of the shoulder is dislocated at points, and repeatedly returns; and it has been dislocated in all parts, and especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not yet healed, for it can be seen and felt well; and it is dislocated according to each shape.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the dislocated shoulder with the healthy one, see it openly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is cut, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary to reset it as soon as possible when the joint is open, for if the joint is open and comes, it would be painful to reset; and perhaps it cannot be reset completely at all, especially when it is in the back; it is better than other dislocations, but causes more great pain, and perhaps it causes death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is, when it can be reset, that you extend your hand to both hands; and his arms are spread, and the hands of the mirror like the shoulder on each side, in and out, and push the joint to its tendons together, or to the root of his palm, until he returns to his place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, then it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and holds the root of the palm that is misaligned.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if he does not want to return to the joint, then apply strong extension; and it is that two ministers extend the arm, and tie it with two ministers, so that it does not move during extension; then turn the arm from each part, then when you have wrapped a double long and wide cloth; and when he sees the joint at his hand, if any oil is used to soften the joint, then press the joint together, as long as it returns; and when it is in place, put a dry plaster with some honey on top, and press it together, and put the arm against the bad shoulder, and leave it for some time, then remove it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	If the joint is firm in its place, then release the limb and leave it; if you see that the joint does not hold well, then begin the bandaging and the limb again, and leave it thus for some time, until it is firmly set; then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	If it feels stiff after the resetting of the joint and it moves, then bathe and rub it well, and press until it is relieved; or place a piece of fat mutton grease on the joint, leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and put in warm water; when it sweats, rub the joint immediately, then place the grease back on, and put in warm water again; do this twice or three times until it is healed; and if you see, then place a piece of moist, hot fat with butter on it, and press it; it will return to its proper position.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The joint of the hand is dislocated, and its return is lighter than other joints. Therefore, it should be quickly reset to its place as soon as it is dislocated, whether the fingers are swollen or if there is an abscess forming.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And the resetting is done by placing the hand on a table, extending the fingers of the hand, and aligning the palm so that it lies over the appearance of the joint, and holding it there until it is fully reset; then you should check if it is properly reset. Therefore, place the fingers on a table for extension and resetting.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	If the dislocation is in the back of the hand, put the patient's hand on their back, and the other person puts their hand over the appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, it is good; if not, apply calming plasters and let it rest until you can begin again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	If it cannot be suffered, and you cannot put it back in place after some time, the joint will remain twisted; and do not attempt to straighten any part of the body until the hand is washed, and nothing can be strained: then cut the tendons or artery; if there is no other means but to straighten by cautery through the skin, and perhaps nothing else works.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, put the plaster that we have said above it, then strain and leave it for 4 days, then remove and leave it thus.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it cannot be moved well, and there is no swelling, then pour boiling water on it, and rub it until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the two fingers
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Fingers are not dislocated at each part of the hand, neither at the back of the palm or the belly; then hold the finger, and reset the dislocation to your fist as it returns, then support the tip of the finger, and push it towards the part where it is disjointed; and leave it for 2 days, and then put it in place that day; and bind it as we have said, and remove the bandage each day, and move it, and rejoin it; and do this often, until it is tight, and do the same if it is dislocated on the belly of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed; and do the same when it is dislocated in other parts.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	backwards dislocation of the shoulder joint
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the shoulder or neck joint is dislocated, and there are many dislocations, there is no cure, for the patient dies from the pain.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs are that the dislocation suddenly moves without volition, cannot be held, and often softens any member, or the two shoulders or both arms or one; and often the shoulder moves at an angle of 90 degrees; this is called "gibbosity": the cure is to reward the gibbosity if it comes from childhood: if there is no cure or healing for the entire time.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And those that come from falling or from percussions or similar things, they said in the old ways of healing with great words, but I have abbreviated them according to my intention and have formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the case of the splint that comes to the front of the leg, there is no engineering or healing; and so with the one that comes directly to the second rib, and one cannot cure it except by the proper one that comes to the back, as I said; and it is that the hairs should be stretched out over his face in a straight line, and he should have some strain outside of him, so that he does not become bloated; then make the bandage at the top on the ground in a firm way, and the other at the bottom, and tie one ligature outside of the hairs of the wound, and the other around the buttocks, and as the hips, and as the knees; and two assistants should secure the ligatures, one at the top and the others at the bottom, among the two bandages; and they should be well fastened, the bandage as we have said, and the poultice put its palms on the spine in a firm way, until it regains.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return by this cure, take a table of three arms' length, and bend it away from the body, and the painful parts be on the side, and press the head of the table away from the body, then put the middle of the table on the spine; and put the mirrors his feet on the other head of the table, and press well, until it returns to its place; and if you see, do it with the twisted one who turns to the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And it is that you fasten two ropes to the head of the painful arm of a long arm, and on the side of the feet two others, and between each rope, outside and inside, one span of length; and in each rope there is one knot, or the twisted one corrects it, and the ropes are firmly on the ground so that they do not move; and between each two ropes there is one rope turning, following the direction of the turned ones, and there are two small ropes of a span of length to turn the twisted one; then tie the ligament that is among the tendons to the twisted one at the head, and the other ligament to the feet on the other twisted one, and each minister turns his turned one to all the ligament, and the masters put the spine evenly as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	When it is even, apply a drying plaster with an abundance of honey, and then soak, and then place the leg on a tablet of three fingers in length, which supports the neck of the spine and the part of the spine that is healthy, then tie it with a bandage as we have said, and use subtle pressure until they are healed; and if anything comes at the end of health, then medicines must be administered that are softening and soothing, with the method that we have mentioned before; and never give one piece of plaster, and never come to appear in the back spine of the back, and it is the bone that opens, for which we should not have any presumption: perhaps it would bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	of hip dislocations
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	The joints of the hip and shoulder do not come out only as dislocations, but not so much like other joints; and the hip joint is dislocated in four parts: inside and outside, and front and back; and more inside than that, and slightly dislocated front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of dislocations inside is such that when one leg with a bad joint is joined with a healthy one, it is longer and more open than the healthy ones, and cannot double its knee to the fire; and it is the legs that are swollen with abscesses, because the cause of the belly comes out.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of one who comes to this deficiency is that these accidents are contrary to those previously mentioned.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of one who has this before are that they stand well on their leg according to completion; however, they do not double over with pain in the groin, and if you want to make them walk, they cannot go forward, and they retain their urine, and swell the ankle, and when they walk, they pass over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of one who has this behind are that they cannot spread their groin, or double over, and the other leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the shoulder is dislocated at the side of the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The symptoms of this type of dislocation are that you will know when the dislocation is old, and it will remain according to its position, if there is no cure; and there is no need for it to be presumptuous.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in this case where the dislocation is fresh, and it is of four types of dislocation, you must quickly return the joint, extend and flex it, and move it to the right and left; perhaps if it returns, there is no need for other treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this manner, it is necessary that you apply strong pressure, and extend the leg firmly to two fingers, or one finger that is tied above the knee; and other ministers extend their hand under the tail in a similar manner as they bite their hands from their sockets, then squeeze the neck of the limb; and others grip the head of the limb; and extend up and down all at once, until the pain is lifted from the ground once, and remains suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common to four similar cases, and if the dislocation has returned as we have said, it is well.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If not, it is necessary to treat its similarity. When the dislocation is in the shoulder, it is necessary to support the misaligned limb on its healthy side, then place the arm over the root of the neck, and the arm that is outside the shoulder, then extend the arm above the shoulder and towards the armpit; then take other ministers to grasp the large arm of the shoulder misalignment, and extend it back into place: it will return to its limb now; and this method of dislocation is lighter than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	If you cannot hold the two affected feet together with a strong sinew above the two heels, and above the two ankles, and the affected leg should be extended two fingers more than the other; then it should be suspended above the head on a stick, and the other arm should be stretched out below the earth; then command the minister to embrace the neck of the back, and another minister should hang with the affected limb, who should embrace the back properly, for the joint is now approaching.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocation is gone, bend the affected limbs as we have described in the case of gout, and stretch the sinew properly above the affected leg and on the foot; then place two ties, one at the head and the other at the foot, then fold the tie between the backbones in the form of the dislocation; and wrap moist cloths around it, so that it does not become stiff, then extend each minister towards him, and the patient put equal to his hand the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, place it on the flat table, and press it as we have said in the gangrene, and cut off the bad parts on the clean side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the bad leg strongly, as I have said; and place the remedy for pain above the bad angle, then press with the other hand, and extend it down towards the groin.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is in the back, it is not necessary to extend the bad leg downwards, nor to lift it up, but it should be as it was when the hip was dislocated backwards, as we have said about lying on the two hips; and it should be on its face, and the hamstring extended as we have said before, and one should press on the joint on the table; and it will be good when the bad legs extend their legs, and they will be even; then support the knees, and put the plaster, and the bandage, so that the hip does not move; and let it rest for three or four days, then release, and put the plaster on; and if you see that they are even, remove the bandage, and let it walk slowly, until the limb is strengthened.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the shoulder dislocation
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The shoulder is dislocated in three ways: namely, from within and without, and from behind; but it does not dislocate from the front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the signs are that you command the patient to bend his leg at the knee, and if he cannot do so at the knee, then it is dislocated; and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit straight, and extend his leg if possible, and put your back against his face, and put your foot on his; then take his shoulder to your palms, and pull between your fingers, then bend the two sides of the shoulder well; and other ministers extend his foot, until the shoulder returns to its place, and the sign is that he can lightly bend his leg at the knee; and put the plaster on, and let the leg and knee cool together for three or four hours, then remove it; and do not work on the patient again until his members are comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the members are not in place, apply strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the back, until they are aligned.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the ankle.
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The ankles are never sprained and never fully dislocated, both inside and outside.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the bone is dislocated, and it can be felt before at the part where it is dislocated: the symptoms are slight, and one should gently extend it slightly to the hands when it is sprained only.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is fully dislocated, you should make the patient sit upright, and hold the painful part with your hands, above the ankle; then take the bone to your right hand, and then to your left twice, then extend it upwards, and strike it well in the upper part; and do this twice, as we have said, by bending and taking the bone; if it returns, it is good; if not, if you repeat the work, it will return; and if it cannot return like this, you should make the patient lie down on their back on the ground, and firmly fix the bone between their legs, and wrap cloths around it so that it does not dislocate; then hold the painful part with your hand, and another minister extends the bone to their hands or to the ligament, where they tie it above the bone; then extend all the ministers equally, and the cloths should be between the legs of the patient to hold the bone when you are extending it; then put the patient's hands even with the dislocation, and another minister holds the leg straight at the side, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when she goes to the point, if she puts the plaster and wipes it above, and the strain forms, and ties the foot to the leg, and holds the nerves that are above the ankle behind, so that the limbs are not too stretched; then leaves her for two or three days, and if the limbs are not straight, then the plaster; then releases her on the third or fourth day, and allows her to walk the injured part for four days; and if she goes before this term, it is not safe that it does not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes, it is necessary that you relieve it as we have said in another place, until it is healthy.
des dois	For the fire cautery, instruct
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the shoulders are dislocated, if they need to be extended, it is a simple matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in any part of the shoulder or the arm, it is necessary to make the patient sit with their bad arm straight out or on a table, and put your hand on what opens these joints, then press firmly on your hand until it regains its place; and when it is even, and there is no opening, put the sole of your foot on the patient's shoulder, then stretch it firmly, and leave it for three hours, then release; and let him rest, until he is healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wounds and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound comes with dislocation, and one wants to restore it, often the pain is fatal: if you are not presumptuous in the cure, and do not know the art well, and have not used it long, and are not merciful and slow, and hardhearted; at the beginning of things, gently treat the abscess, and leave the pain in God's hands, if you see no hope of health; and when you see hope, now reset the member to its place, as soon as the abscesses have subsided; and when the member is in place, administer gentle treatment for healing, as is appropriate, from time to time; and if with dislocation there is fracture, and small bones are broken, remove them, and do what we have said about simple diseases; and beware of entering the path of fear, according to what I have said, because it is better for you according to your Creator, and for the knowledge of your armor and body.
Amen	1. For the fire ca
