O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	Oh you, very learned sons, I have completed this book which is the end of the science of medicine, and I have filled it with its contents, and I have made the end by its explanations and by its statements.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is fortified in our region and is entirely extinguished, so is the science and the knowledge of it perished, and there remains nothing but the small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this, there came error and futility, and the minds were closed and knowledge was distant.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems to me that I can revive it together with the order of this treatment according to the way of exposure and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of cauterizing irons, and other tools of the work with the addition of declaration and preparation of them, as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	Because of this reason that no good master of hands is found in our time, the art of medicine has been prolonged.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for those who undertake it to surpass in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until they know the judgment of the limbs, and their forms and conjunctions and separations of all, and have knowledge of the bones and nerves and sinews and the number of joints, and the movement and resting of them, and the source of their issue.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And because Hippocrates says that we are not with the body much, and with the work is little; and equally in the art of hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you in the introduction of this book that those who are not knowledgeable about the things mentioned before, if they attempt to perform it, may cause error and harm people; thus I have often seen many of those who engage in this science and abandon their sense and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a foolish man who lanced an abscess of scrofula or boil from a woman’s neck, and lanced the arteries of the neck; because so much blood issued out that the woman died between her hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	And another case treated another physician who removed a bone from an old man's ear, and the bone was large; it took with him a piece of the bladder, and died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called for the extraction, and saw the position of the misalignment and the size of the bone, and if it was cut properly, it would have died.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And another physician took care of the Duke of our land who had his leg broken, and with the breaker he got a wound; and the physician, due to ignorance, kept the fracture over the wound for a long time, and did not let any blood out of the wound, and so it ended in this way; and he commanded that it not be moved at all; and so the leg became completely infected and the foot and came to destruction.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I am summoned to come to him, and I was urged to come to dislocate the leg; and when I heard it dislocated so was in pain and did not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But all ways to the corruption were already confirmed or member, and could not be healed; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the member until the member was completely lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another method that would crush the abscess and cause it to gangrene, and then inflame because of its lordship's malice.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For gangrene, when it is pure of melancholic humor, does not require that one touch it with iron if it is not in the joint where one can completely remove everything that is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And therefore, dear son, I advise you to know that work of hands is divided into two divisions: namely, when it is in many positions; and I will show in each part of this book where it has fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	For this reason, it is important that you keep these things, so that the evil-minded cannot speak ill of you if you take up your arms firmly and seriously, and use the best way, by the grace of God, you will come to salvation and be saved; and leave behind diseases that cause great suffering; and remove the doubts from your mind, and have faith in yourself so that you can come out of this world to the next of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galen warns in some of his admonishments: 'Do not take on the care of a very ill patient, unless you are called a fool.'
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have divided this treatment into three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters are about fire cauteries and non-fire medical cauteries, and the chapters are ordered from the head to the feet; and about the forms of instruments, and the irons of cauteries, and all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapters are about cutting and piercing, and about wounds, and about the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and the chapters are ordered and about the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; it is ordered from the highest to the lowest, and the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	As we remember the work, it is necessary for me to explain the quality of the help and harm of each kind of substance.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality of help and harm is the longest and most subtle science and the secretest art; and for this reason many wise men spoke about it and agreed on it; and I do not speak much about it because I make it long.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that the fire cauterizes universally to all substances where it has matter, whether the substance is hot with matter or dry with matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry weather, they all agreed that the fire cautery is great help; but others said the opposite: that the fire cautery is only helpful for diseases that come from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be cured with heat or dryness; but those who said the opposite claimed that the fire cautery helps greatly with hot and dry diseases that come from within people's bodies.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of the man and its moisture to the hot fire, you burn the body too much.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it once by experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And all the ways, do not interfere unless those who have experienced it and know by long usage the chapter of cautery, and the diversity of human constitutions, and their dispositions and causes of diseases, and remedies and space of time; for other constitutions we have no fear, specifically in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the parts gathered together and agreed to the cauterization.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, my children, that cauterization with fire is one of the secrets of healing, and greater goodness than cauterization with burning medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For the fever is simple, and it comes only to the member that is cooked, and does not harm other members unless it has a name.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The burning medicines come from one member to another by separating, and bring diseases of the body to the sick member; and perhaps the evil fever for its high degree and for the goodness of its substance does not harm, if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And I have found this by experience and by the length of the service and study that I have put into the art, and it has been above the truth of things; and for this reason I excuse myself from the length of speech, because I do not like to give you the secret which is hidden or fire, and the quality of the work, how it cures diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; now receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they should be done at what time the cautery is made, and then prayed upon.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that the cautery is beneficial in all times, because the harm that comes from it is removed by the help of the cautery; and indeed if the cautery is for necessary pain, not only for minor injuries that cannot wait until the greatest harm comes to the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And do not think, son, as the fools do; for the disease that is cured by cautery has no return; and they say so because it is not so, because cautery is only medicine that moves the complexion, and dries the humors that are cause of pain, and is better medicine for its speed of its value, and for the virtue of its work and its power.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	It is also possible that the disease comes at any time according to the nature of the pain and the condition of the patient and its power; and they are assembled in him the superfluities by the acquisition of foods and similar things, if not cauterize administered in him where he has little superfluity and moisture, as cauterize for the pain, and similar things, and the pain does not return much; but this happens little.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	Many people do not understand why cauterizing is called the last resort of medicine, and it is seen; but they do not believe that cauterizing is effective after medicine, but their intentions are false, and cauterizing is the last resort of medicine because when we administer methods of treatment in any disease and they do not work, then we administer the cautery, and it is worth it.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, it is necessary to understand that cauterization is one of the main methods of medicine, not according to the intention of those who are misled.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that a cauterizing instrument of gold is more effective than iron, and they only mentioned that it was due to the quality of gold and its high value; and they said that the wounds of cauterization do not cause pain, but I have found that this is not true, as I have experienced it, and in some people, it is seen. A cauterizing instrument of gold is more effective than iron, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And when you heat an instrument of gold, you should not be deceived by its color, and it has cooled somewhat; and if it is heated too much, they put it in the fire; and thus it has enough protection.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason, we use the fire cautery that we have prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or I would order you this chapter of the shoulder joint from head to foot, for it is easier to find in the body.
dou cautere olivaire	The oil cauterization
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cauterization is useful for moisture and cold on the head, and it is done for two reasons: because of a disease called "soda", and because of many humors that descend from the shoulder to the ears, and due to many dreams and toothache, and throat pain, and indeed for all diseases that come from cold, such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cauterization is that the hairs should be removed by medicine, changing the head's color three or four times, depending on its virtue, age, and custom, so that the hair can tolerate it; then, replace the head of the hair.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then, let him sit crossed between your hands, and place his hands on top of your feet; after that, put the root of your palm above the root of his nail between his two eyes; and where your fingers come out, if it bleeds, heat the cauterization called "olivare", from which comes its form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place the joint in its place with ink, and apply pressure and gentle stretching; then remove your hand slowly, and reward the joint if you see the bone slightly; and if you do not see it, start the fire cautery again until you see the bone as I have told you; after that take a little string, and put soft cotton inside, and place on the joint, and leave it for three hours; then put on a moistened cloth; let it burn until the wound is healed; after that cure the wound called "tetrafarmaçon" until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the ancients said, that the longer one keeps the wound open, the more it purges; and for this reason, it helps to heal.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And none of these said that one should cauterize the wound so much that a part of the bone is burned, and then remove what is burned from the bone, and be healed.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And the others said that one should cauterize the wound so much above, and if one removes bone as wide as a needle that women put in their hair to let the humors come out; and the wound should be kept open long; afterwards, it should be cured and sewn.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	These two methods of cauterization do not seem to be very good for everyone, except in some people where there is a view of fear; and I think that I should leave it; because the affected parts are weakened by continuous solutions of nature, as we testify in other members; and indeed when the affected part is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterization is more safe and mild for me, and from this use I operate in such cases.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the ancient pain of the main
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When the main pain comes from chronic conditions that last a long time, then one should use the remedies of years and pills called "cochie", and detoxification of head and eyes and plasters; and if one does the cauterization that we have previously mentioned, and it does not help.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	When the affected part of the patient is of a very bad nature, and it is not too cold; then cauterize with that fire cautery which we have mentioned above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est I leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After cauterizing each horn of the head to the bone, as we have mentioned before, and applying the cauterization which is called "vasselz"; and it is in the parts where one puts suction; and raise your hand so that you do not see the bone: the pains are much greater in this cauterization than in others, and I will speak about that later; and it is necessary that the cauterizations of the horns be more subtle than that which is used to cauterize the middle of the head, and it is as follows:
dou cautere dou chief	The fire cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When a sudden pain comes to a part of the head, and the illness has spread to the oil, and the patient is purged by mundane medicines, and the other treatments that I have mentioned in the division of diseases have not helped: then I apply cauterization in two ways, namely by medicine and by fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cauterization by medicine is such that you hold a piece of iron, and scrape off the skin and the scab, and then apply it to the patient in this way: press the affected part so that you can replace the piece of iron outside the skin; and when it is replaced, bind and fix it well and leave it for twelve hours; then remove it and treat further with a piece of cloth dipped in oil, and leave the wound for two or three days; then apply a poultice made of bread soaked in honey.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the application of the ointment until they are healed; and if you see that it causes some harmful substances that I have written or prescribe treatment for harmful substances.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The fire cauterization is done in this way.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cauterizing iron of such a shape:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "clos" because the head is made in the shape of a clo or it has a small hook, and in the middle has a small appearance; and place it on the painful spot, and hold your hand and gently press the iron, until half of the skin is burned; and lift your hand so that the artery does not burn, as it is before, and there flows abundantly blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After placing gauze on the bone, and leaving it there for three days; then place moistened cotton on the wound, and treat the wound with ointment until it is healed; and if you wish to cauterize this wound with the cauterizer called "cultellare", apply it at all points, and be careful not to cover the artery in this wound which is not ancient.
de emigraine	of the wound
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat the wound as we have previously described in the division of diseases, and it does not improve, and you see that the cauterizer before mentioned does not suffice with the medicine and the fire does not suffice to heal it; then it is necessary to extinguish the cauterizer called "cultellare" until it is white; and similarly apply it to the wound one line of half a finger's breadth, and take your hand once, and do not cover the artery and do not bring it close to the bone; and guard against the mandible that moves when it is moved, and the nerves have no regard except the moving one and that spasm does not cause pain, and guard against the discharge of blood from the artery when it is cut, or when it is cut off, with great fear and immediately to those who do not know, and who are not experienced; and leave the work in this way; but I will tell you how to stop the bleeding when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it appears in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this fire cauterization does not suffice for the disease, and the pain is severe, cauterize it with the head of the chief as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you see, administer the cauterization that we have said or in the chapter of the extraction of the artery, with the cauterization that has two knives; and this fire cauterization is better than the other and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain of the ears from coldness
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When in the ear comes pain from coldness, and one has opened of medicines soluble and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pain does not move, then heat this cauterization which is called «poins», of which is the form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait X poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After pricking all around the ear, wherever the pain is located on both sides, and moving it slightly away from the root of the ear until you have signaled the point where it should be; then apply X poins around each ear; after that, cure the ear as long as it is healthy.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture that must be cured by cauterization is only of those that move from fluid, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not apply cauterization to similar things that come from sweat and spittle of the mouth.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you encounter this similar torture that moves from a stream of tears and spitting of the chief and gargling, and does not work, then it is necessary to cauterize the pain with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and the other a little further from the temple, and the third in the corner of the mouth; and put the cautery in the part that opens healthily, and make the cauterization at the top of the ear a little above a piece of horn of the chief, and another in the temple as long as a pin; and leave the cautery so high that half of the curse is arsed; and this is the form of the cauterization:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it resembles the cauterization instrument that we have placed before, but it is a little more subtle and it is necessary that the knife be a little thicker; afterwards, cure the wound as I have previously said, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres: II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said, and it does not improve, and the pain does not have fever, then do four cauterizations: two above the two horns of the head, and one in the forehead, and one on the part called «vasselz» as we have previously said, and the back cauterization on the mouth of the stomach; and cure it as we have said before.
de litargie	of laziness
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease, it is recommended to give the patient large and modified brain-altering pills; then, after removing the entire head of the disease, place the mustard plaster on the occipital lobe, as written or treated with plasters; and this is the way of the cauterization: if you do so as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is thus healthy, it is good; and if not, make three cauterizations of the emulsion on the head in descending from the neck to the collarbone, and have a space of one large between each cautery; and the cure as with the others, and if you have seen to support, and the diseases are suffering, make one cautery in the middle; and if the profession is, two more on the two horns, and the cure until it is healthy; and let the cauteries which are called "olivare", as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of the cold of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be cleansed of years and of the matter that we have previously mentioned; after that, apply heat to the painful part of the head, then cauterize behind each ear and on each horn, and if you have more skill, and the body is wet and the pains are severe, and the disease is external, then perform four cautery strokes on the spine of the back; and leave it until the most painful part has healed, and remove your hand; afterwards, treat it as long as it is healthy, and let the cauteries that are called "olivare" be as we have previously mentioned.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The epileptic should not use fire cauterization except for the flatulent one, and it is necessary to first modify the brain from years and other cures that we have said in the division when the pains are great and suffering from a lack of medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a child who cannot suffer, give them gargling and chewing to modify the brain often with good meats; after that, roast the head in the middle, and then do cauterization according to what we have said before, and cauterize on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the pains are far and suffering, do cauterization as I have said to those who have paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauterization be with olive oil according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the pain is sharp, then perform the delicate cauterization as follows:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to melancholy, there are excessive or corrupted moisture and the wound is large, then use the cauterizing iron as we have said for those who have paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to melancholy, there is excessive moisture declining towards melancholy, and the wound is moist with blood, then give the patient a drink of something by which the brain may be purified, according to what it is before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After removing the head of the pain; after making a good linen tortilla, like a circle, and placing it on the head; if the pain is sharp, and it is held firmly from all sides; then present the liniment, and use an ancient butter of elderberry; and heat it to a moderate temperature, so that the patient can bear it; then remove the circle from inside the head, and let it cool; and do this to the pain every week once with another good government until it is healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Where you have seen cauterization, do not make pricks all over the cauterizer.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This method of cauterization moistens the brain, and then place a piece of soft cotton in oil and in the fat of a goose.
de l’awe des eulz	of the eye's
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the eye first comes to the eyes by the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and give the patient a mundifying thing for the head, and guard against all moisture, and make it sweat or bathe it several times a day.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After that command him to turn his head, and make the cauterizer behind the head, and give him two cauterizers above the two temples together, or one on each side; and cover all the cauterizer with the veins and arteries that are outside the skull, and let the cauterizer be long according to the width of the temple; and guard against the escape of blood, and if you see too much blood flowing, then stop it with a cloth.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision of the cauterization as you would do it; and never has it been done or heated from the two back bones.
dou cors des larmes	The path of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are above the veins, or below the arteries that are in the appearance of the main deformed; and one sees that it is superfluous cold fluorescent, then the cautery that I have said at the beginning of the chapter descending to the eyes: I cautery emmi the chief, and II cauterize above the II temples, and II cauterize or heateril desoz the II os; and if there is more, if the sagely desus the sorcil a tout I petit cautere.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	through the tears through the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat the patient according to what we have said in the section, and it does not improve, then drink a bad mixture of three herbs; afterwards, boil the head, and apply cauteries or a mixed cauteries called "clavilis" on the two sores, a little away from the hair; and guard the artery that you do not cover it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of cauteries called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of oil is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize with this cauteries called "olivare".
de coi ci est li forme:	For this reason, this is the form:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that it is necessary to apply two cauteries above the two sorbips as long as the sorbis themselves are; and do not leave your hand except until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	the hairs that do not oil
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Never has it happened that the hairs of the oiled ones are converted to the parchedens, and they oil, and then one applies cauteries in two ways: that is to say, by fire, or by burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow long and even, then prick the hairs; afterwards place a piece of paper under the eyes to hold them steady; then put soft cotton moistened with eagle's oil and musk on the wound, then heat the fire cauterization in the form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cauterize slowly and gently a few times, until the pain is less intense in that place; and the sign of the work's health is that you see the paper retreat, and the hairs stand upright; then remove your hand, and leave it thus for three hours, then put soft cotton moistened with butter until the burn is healed; afterwards treat the wound with ointment until it is healthy.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after this the hairs come back, and the paper is softened, then begin the cauterization again on the same spot, as you did before; and if the hairs are lacking, then cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural level, and is even, and do not prick at the hair with it.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The cauterization of medicine with fire is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; then take a piece of parchment in the shape of a myrtle leaf; then take French soap and live quartz, one of each, and grind them together well; and apply it strongly, so that it does not cool, then spread it on the form you have made like the myrtle leaf, and place it on the paper at the eyes; and if the patient's illness is only in one eye, then cover only that one, and do the same for the other; and place a piece of soft cotton cloth underneath to prevent burning; and the patient should be in a healthy state and show the medicine, and press the poultice every time the patient feels the burning sensation of the medicine, because it feels like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then take the medicine to your mouth.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the blister has burst, lift the limb upwards, and rewarm it if you see the paper rising as it was raised by constraint of fire or by incision; and if so, it is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, still apply the medicine above the limb or where the medicine has not worked, until your work is even, and your eyes are set; then put moist cotton on the wound until the curses are chosen, after care, the limb of the ointment which is called «dyafenis» and others, until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you have the duty to stay well within your work, by great care that it does not pierce through the medicine with those.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the oil, then restart the medicine on that one which is softened by the proper paper, as you have done before; then cure until it is healed; and this is the form of the fuel of the mire:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And since the sizes of men's hairs are different in greatness and smallness, and according to what your constraints are; and do not return the right way to that one who is the study of this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	of the treatment of a fistula with cauterization
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have mentioned in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not work, then it is necessary to cauterize it in this way.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Command the patient to place his head in your safe hands; and bind his head between your hands in such a way that it does not move, nor move his head; afterward, put cotton moilliet behind the ear or on the side of persillion above the oil; after heating the cauterizer which is there: and fasten it to the head as if it were the form of a pen of vouteul, just like that which is the cauterizer; if you see, so it is appointed from one head to the other, and if you see, so it is also like a tent; but whatever, this which is fastened is good for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula, it is opened, and the pus is removed and dried; if it is closed, open it again, and scrape out the inside of the bowels; after that, apply the cauterizer hot and evenly, and hold your hand on the cauterizer at the part of the neck below the oil, so that your hand does not cause harm; and put the cauterizer into the oil grease, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cauterizer at the bone, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, if you have experience, and let it lie for three days; after that, put on a piece of soft cotton in butter, and the ointment of desiccating until it is healed, and if forty days pass without being healed, then put on corrosive medicine until the bone is discovered; and the king according to what he would come in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a method of cauterizing a fistula that no one of the ancients said.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	To the fistula, and close the wound; after put in the fissure some subtle powder of which this is the form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	And they make of the quantity of one drachm of pitch; and hold your hand or the powder firmly, and do not move the hairs until the pitch melts and does not spread to the oil; and it is necessary to put above the oil on the hair cotton moistened with water or oil: the pitch heals the wound of the fistula, and the skin by marvelous health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the sinus is healed by the fire cautery that we have mentioned, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, then one must administer poultices to the throat, and bring the sinus back to its proper place in the throat according to what is fitting for it.
des crevaices en levres	of cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times there are cracks in the lips that are called "hair", and at the same time in the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as we have mentioned in the chapter on divisions, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small cauterizing needle according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put the patient in those cracks until he comes just to the point of fainting; after that, care for the broken limb with plaster until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes at the root of the throat or in the eye, or in the palate, or in the roots of the teeth, after it has putrefied and rotted and become aged and turned into a fistula; and if you cure it as we have said in divisions, it does not improve: then it is necessary that you use the cauterization according to the quantity of the fistula; afterwards, plug or puncture the fistula, and keep your hand there until the hot iron reaches the end of the limb, and behind the limb; and do thus once or twice, after caring for it as we have said in cures, until it is healed; and if it is cured thus, it is good; and if not, if necessary, you must expose the limb and remove the rotten bone, according to what you find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat them with medicines but it does not work, then put the tip of a sharp, heated iron in your mouth; place the hot iron on the tooth; hold your hand steady so that the pain feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; then remove your hand and restart the iron according to your will; then fill the patient's mouth with salt water, and let them rinse for an hour and spit it out.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in a similar manner, the tooth that was moving is confirmed, and the gum softened by restraint, and the moisture corrupted dried.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When pain from the teeth comes from coldness, or there is cold or wind, and medical remedies do not help, then it is necessary to use cauterization in two ways: cauterization with butter and cauterization with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cauterization with butter is such that you take butter from a freshly killed animal, and the end in an iron or brass spoon; afterward take cotton and wrap it around the point of a tent, and moisten it in hot butter, and place it on the painful tooth firmly and hold it until it is cooled; and thus do often enough until its power reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see that moistened wool and cotton in hot butter is placed on the aching tooth, and place the heated iron over it until the fire comes to the movement of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	If the cautery is such that you hold a hot iron or copper, and it is large enough that the heat does not reach the mouth of the wound; after heating the cautery, because of which the wound will form afterwards, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled; do this often, for the pain will be as great that same day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is necessary that the wound fill its mouth with good butter in the urgency of this cautery, and then the rinse; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And apply the fire cautery to the head that you wish, and according to what you have at hand; and this is the form of the knife:
des scrophules	of scalpels
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scalpels are thin and cold, and do not obey digestion by medicines, then heat the fire cautery of head with this form, and have two openings for the fumes to issue from the other side; and put the fire cautery hot on the abscess once, or as often as it approaches the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, put the fire cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it thus for three days; and put wool moistened in butter over the burn until the sore is opened; afterward care for the wound with ointments and tents until it is healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the skull:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When moisture overcomes the channels of the body, and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary to first remove the hairs by medicines that dissolve; after that, apply cauterization at the root of the throat, and do not come too close to the throat, and do not burn too much but with a small amount.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that, apply another cauterization at the joint of the neck to the top of the spine, and let the cauterizer that is called "clavile" because of which we have the form in front; and cure the limb as we have said before until it is healed.
de la toust	of the mouth
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and the disease of the mouth are from cold moisture, and the pains have no fever or sweat, and this is an ancient disease, then make two cautery burns on the forceps in their own eyes; and the other cauteries emmi the worst between the two breasts; and let the cauteries that are called «clavile» according to the form that is before said.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see, make cauteries by holding the entire cautery that is called «poins» because of the form that is above in the disease of the ears; and let the poins be just a little less than 30, or around.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After treatment, the patient according to what has been said before, and let the burns be cauterized with three applications of this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And because the cauteries are lighter, because you make three at a time.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the shoulder dislocation
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After, shave the hairs on the back and on the side; then relieve the pain in the area of the tenderness with your right hand; and if the joint is misaligned inside, heat the cauteries that have two needles in this form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and cauterize the wound until it pierces just to the costal, and bring the four cauteries together; and because of this, the cauterization is made with the cauterizer that has three needles, because the figure of cauterization is these four needles; and they are the nerves according to the subtlety of a tent and it is the form of the cauterizer that has three needles.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And sometimes they are placed on this one nerve because there are eight cauterizers.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After put the cauterizer on the broken parts; after rest the wound, and do not move the limbs by long tension until it is well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above, this thing happens quickly, then make a cautery above the thick edge of the cautery, or many cauteries in pinching.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and it is stiff with moisture and is free from pain.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When cold and much moisture come to the stomach until it reaches its condition, and they multiply the diarrhea in him, and are customary methods of cures and he does not improve, then it is necessary that the pains be soothed above his back, and extends his legs and hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	After that, apply three cauteries on the tongue with a thin probe, as much as the quantity of one drop, to all the cautery clavile, and two cauteries afterwards on the two ribs until the figure of the cauteries is at three angles, and have equal space between them so that they are not joined together when they move; and let the cautery be so sharp that it pierces both sides of the tongue, and let the figure of the cauteries be in this form without twisting:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you see that the cauterization is done with a great cautery in the stomach according to this form; and the one who has fear of this cautery, cauterizes by holding and looking up at the stomach i. point according to the quantity that you see of it; then cauterize all the cautery which is called «poins».
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the care of the care that we have had before, as long as they are healthy.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver comes with pain from heat and moisture and great swelling, as long as it is not removed from its natural complexion by excess; and the hairs are treated as we have said in divisions, and it does not help them much, so it is necessary that the hairs be above their hairline; and the sign of three cauteries according to this form and figure and quantity above the liver, below the hypochondres, where the ears of the ox come; and there should be a space between each cauterization the thickness of one; and the cauterizations should be long as the length of the body, and do not press much with your hand throughout the cauterization; and it should be applied only to the half of the belly, and the hairs should be straight up; and if he cannot, then let him lie down, and extend his legs, and raise his arms; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if you wish to cauterize these cauteries with a cutting instrument, if you are skilled and wise in the art, and you watch that you do not burn all the surrounding area, for you would make it harder all over; and that it does not come close to boiling, for the wounds are very delicate in that place, and the skilled ones must see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When he has an abscess in the liver, and you see whether it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: if it is in the flesh, he does not feel much pain; and if it is in the membrane, he feels sharp pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	When this treatment is over, it is necessary that the wound be covered with a bandage; then apply a poultice to the affected area, and then heat the cauterizing iron which is similar to a thorn, because of this:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	Then cauterize the wound until the pus is all out; after the treatment according to the treatment of swellings as long as they are healthy; and it is only necessary to use this cauterizing iron for those who have studied long in the art of medicine, and by whose hands these diseases have never been corrupted.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Therefore, it can be boldly done, and it seems to me that it is worth leaving it alone.
dou cautere de pleuresin	the fire cauterization
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that one should use the cauterization of aristolochia roots, and in this way: take a long aristolochia root, the longest you can find, and dry it, and as thick and long as your finger; and moisten it in oil, and take the cautery to the fire, and cauterize the cautery between the eyebrow and the forehead, and two small cauteries a little down on the part that is outside the beard; and two cauteries between the shoulder blade and the spine, leaning back a little; and one cautery underneath, and one above the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two on the lower part in front of the cautery that is between the shoulders; and do not press your hand, but open it as if smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And no one said any ancient man that no man used a fire cauterizer similar to a razor, and they would scrape it and put it between the ribs, until it came to an abscess; and the pain was so great, as we have said in the liver abscess.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work, there is fear or the pain kills now, or a fistula comes that cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the mouse disease that we have said in the divisions of treatments, and it does not improve, then they try three methods of cauterization that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	When there is a certain way that you make three or four cauteries, lining up according to the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the cauterizing iron that we have mentioned before; and do not press your hand all over the cauterizing iron, and let the hairs be on its back; and another way of cauterizing is that you heat the cauterizing iron with two needles, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and relieve the part where the hairs are located, or where the pain comes from the left side, and let the elevations that you relieve the part according to its curve, according to the length of the body, and the cauterizing iron should be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After boiling the two needles until the curve is perceived from the other side, then remove the caustic, and thus enter into it with four. And if you see, then cauterize the whole caustic with three needles.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment when it has gotten putrefaction by long time, and this is useful that the other of the treatments before said.
de ydropisie	of hydropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Caustic does not help with hydropsy, except in the manner which is called "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you treat it according to the methods that we have said in divisions, and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary that you make four cauteries around the belly, and one above the stomach, and one above the liver, and one above the spleen, and one behind the back above the spine, and one at the worst place; and let the cauteries be close to the part that is most affected.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After leaving the cauterizer open for too long, and not letting the care of the wound after the cauterization rest, and healing would rush, and together with God's help, the two intentions would be accomplished.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the cauterizer for the belly is like the one we have shown before; and for the back, it is an oil lamp, as it is written before.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the feet are swollen to the one who is hydroptic, and they are plain of a yellowish wound, you must cauterize above the foot between the auricular and the anular; and let your hand with the cauterizer towards returning.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deeply, thus avoiding the sharp edges, and let the cauteries be done according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After making incisions on both legs, two cauteries are done in each leg at the tip of a short knife; and let the cauteries be long, one behind the knee in front and the other in front of the knee on the leg; and leave the cauteries hanging for a long time to cure, as the wound may reopen; after curing the other treatments that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	of the bandage
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	When the solution of the belly comes from cold and moisture, as long as the retentive and digestive virtues that are in the stomach and in the intestines are blocked, and cannot be cured by other methods; and you see the pain is great and of great virtue, if you make a large cauterization on the stomach according to what it has spoken of before or cauterization of the stomach, around the cauterization; and IV cauterizations around the belly, and II cauterizations on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see abundant moisture and the patient is suffering from pain, apply fire cauterization on the nail, and I cauterize on each joint, and II small cauterizations on the stomach below the great one, for the cure is beneficial when it has good assistance.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the treatment of warts
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When the warts are deeply rooted, or one or more, and are old and are large humors cold and moist corrupted, and are treated as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit, then apply cauterizations: III on the spine of the back, which is all before uncovered little by little and little in triangulating, and I cauterize outside the belly II doses; and if you think that his stomach is cooled, and the food does not cook, and one sees the face swells, then the face I a large cauterization on the stomach, as it is said before, and I another on the liver, and I another on the mouse at all the cauterization clavile; and leave the cauterization open long.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After healing, the limb when it is healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the flesh which is called "thelul
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you cut into the "thelul", if the heated cautery seems like a razor, and then put it all on fire over the cut "thelul"; and let your hand as far as the cauterizer comes to the birth of the vein, from which there is no bleeding; do this once or twice, and if there is much "thelul", cauterize each one as we have said; after curing the wounds until they are healthy; and if you cauterize with a large cautery high on the "thelul", it will have greater help.
de plaie mal curee	of a poorly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the wounds cannot be treated by a surgeon or opened, we will tell you what to do in such cases, as there is an illness that cannot be cured except by cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When any fistula comes, and it is alert and poured with pus and corrupted moisture, then you should apply a thin tenture to it all, and make sure to remove the tenture as much as possible when it becomes full.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After heating the cautery that seems like a razor, and pushing it into the fistula according to the amount that the tenture has entered, and restarting the cauterization as long as the wound is still bleeding and corrupted, once or twice, or three times, depending on the amount of blood loss; and be careful not to burn the nerves that are nearby, and large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	If the fistula goes to the center of the bladder and the intestine, if you do not take care of these parts, and only treat where it is needed, and think that it is not healed; after treating the part as long as it is healthy, and if the parts are sewn together, and the matters are removed along with the tension, then the part is healed completely; and if the matters are not removed, then sew the part together, and corrode the bone at the fontanelle; and thus like one of those that we will say in its part.
de la maladie des reins	of the kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When severe pain comes to the kidneys, and great swelling, and does not take the form of a woman, then it is necessary that you apply cautery to the kidneys on both sides with the clavile cautery that we have already mentioned; and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a line, and they will be greater help.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is small and weak from heat and moisture, and the patient cannot hold their urine, then perform a cautery in the part before the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic area begin, and on both sides, and let each cauterization be as long as a finger; and make one cauterization in front of the back, or two if you have need; and let the clavile cauterization be done according to the form previously mentioned.
de la marris	of the marsh
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the marsh is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception, and the flowers are corrupted and late in coming: then it is necessary to make three cauterizations around the womb, as we have said about the cautery of the bladder, and two cauterizations in front of the back; and let the clavile cauterization be done as previously mentioned.
de la hainche	Of the waist
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When viscous moisture descends to the waist bone, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and it is found that the muscles of the buttocks are torn, then you should cauterize the injury above the waist bone with a cautery resembling a circle, and sign it around the bone as it turns, so that the bone is inside the circle; and if it is such a cauterization as has been used for the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cauterization is not present, then make three cauterizations of large olives, and let the cauterizations be done as before with all the courts; and the care until they are healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain of the waist
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes to the waist, and it is from cold and moisture, and the evils are caused by what we have said in the division and the cure does not help, and the disease is ancient: then it is necessary that you purge the evil of the large humors with fetid pills, or other good-smelling pills similar.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After the cauterization; and the manner of the cauterization is as follows: it is to say together with burning medicines, and fire cauterization.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cauterization is also in many ways, such as: that you cauterize above the waist three triangular cauterizations in this form, and do good depth and large, and let between each cauterization of space the size of a finger, and it is the olive cauterization; never made on the middle of the back, because there are four according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see, the cautery is applied with a circular cauterizer as we have previously mentioned in the dislocation of the shoulder; but do it in such a way that the circle contains the entire shoulder, and all the tendons should be included.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the way it is done in lumbar puncture, when the pain remains in the shoulder and does not reach the thigh or leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it comes to the thigh and leg, then apply two cauterizers where the hairs indicate that the pain is located, and one cautery at the ankle four fingers wide, on the right side; and let the cauterizing knife cut through the tendon; and let the thickness of the tendon be included. And if the patient feels that the pain extends to two or three inches or near the knee, then cauterize where the pain is felt three or four times at the cautery called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if the profession is, then do more; and if the pain is dislocated from the groin towards the thigh, then cauterize with a cauterizing or circular cautery, and be careful in all your cauterizations that you do not leave the cautery too long, burning the nerves and large arteries, and do not cause greater harm and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	I have also seen many who cauterized above the ankle of the foot, and left it too long that the leg was completely gangrenous, and the foot also, and all the feet were rotten and corrupted.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a bout of vomiting, which resulted in death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is on both sides together, perform cauterization on both, as follows.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And in the cauterization of the loins, this is how it should be done: use such a knife and make it as thick as a navillon of a thumb, or slightly less, and make it into a hook and insert it between the ribs and make it crosswise from one side to the other, with the length of a new penny; and the hooks should be above two parts, and they should also be like needles, and there should be a good handle.
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be heated until it is completely red and has a metallic scent, and then place it on the back of the misaligned shoulder, and turn it over to the healthy side; and cauterize once with the cautery and leave it for three days; and then apply a poultice of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; after the treatment of ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasis says that we use this cautery little because of its fearsome appearance, and few see those who use it; however, it is a good cautery that can bear much, and where it takes effect.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The cauterizing instrument of fiery medicine is such that you make a tool with notches on the edge of the door frame, and it is either of brass or iron at one end, and at the top, it has two prongs, and each has an amount of grease of a dog; and they are open below and above, and they join together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After placing the hot stone on the sore back lying on its side, and quickly moving your hand over the hot stone; afterwards, pour between the two circles of the hot water that has been heated at the fire one pint, and let it stand for an hour, and suffer the sores with the heat and the burning of the water.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Because there is also true cauterization as with fire; and when the cauterizations have passed, gently lift your hand with the instrument and raise the loins from below softly, and let it rest for three hours, and put butter on until the black of the scar is removed; and leave it for three hours that putrefaction may be restricted; and this would be the last help after the cure of wounds until they are healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has spread to the thigh or the leg, then make the instrument that tingles the skin according to what you have done in the loins, and this is the way of the hot iron, and I have written about it in the treatment of rectification of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take equal parts of lime and live chalk, and grind them together, and put them in a new earthenware pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	If there is a small hole that cannot be filled with the point of a razor, then put the other pot well filled with water on top of it, and pour in alkali and chalk and vinegar until you have two parts of powder; then let it sit until all the liquid has dripped off, and throw away the pot, then take all the remaining liquid and pour it over chalk and alkali as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And then it will be very watery and administered in the form of medicine drops and cauteries for other members, because it does great work like fire, and if there are other medicines that cauterize the back well, such as anacardi and chalk with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells us of a cure where some were healed of the pain in the back and loins, and much relief was given, and it was said that no other cure was given, and they were healed once when this cure was performed, and he bathed as it is shown here afterward.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And he said in a similar manner that you should take a small amount of fresh and dry turnip and grind it thoroughly with a little grease, and put it on the back and on the thigh and on the leg where the pain is, and wrap it; and leave it for three hours until the hairs no longer feel the burn.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	Then let the patient enter a warm bath until the body is slightly warmed up, and then let them lie down, and the pain will disappear completely and they will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And it should be noted that no one should use such cauterizing medicines unless after the evacuation of blood.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides says that when the vein is sciatic and is cauterized with the horn of a goat, it helps greatly; and it should be done in this way by the cauterizers.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take oil and rub it on the skin, and place it on the fossa between the thumb and the other one called the thenar.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	After taking dry goat fleece, and placing it on fire until it becomes charcoal, and putting it on the wound, and leaving it there until it is soaked; and then repeating this process, and not ceasing to do so until you think by sense that it comes near to the skin, and that the pain has ceased; and this method of cauterization is called "goat's fleece cauterization".
de la dolor dou dos	of double pain.
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or by impact or from too great evacuation, or from similar expanded cold matter, none of these remedies is effective, because it is for those who have recently undergone an infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	Afterwards, it is necessary to apply foul-smelling pills or similar substances on the hairs where the pain is located, three lines wide, and in each line, five cauteries or more according to the virtue and quantity that the hairs can bear; and let the cauteries be applied according to the cautery called "poins"; and if you see, apply three or four at the middle cauterizing iron of this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This disease often comes to small children, and the signs of its onset are that they have narrowed alarns when they move, and fear; and you will find in the last spine of the back and in the appearance that comes above the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you see it healed, if you cauterize with the fire cautery according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	If the fire cautery penetrates each part of the spine.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, if you cauterize around the spine with the fire cautery touching two or three lines, and the points are close together.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After healing the limb as long as it is healthy according to what we have said, and ensure that you do not administer fire cautery in a place where there is a spasm of a nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When pain in the joints is caused by moisture that has spread to each limb of the body, and when pain comes suddenly, which is properly called "gout", and when it is caused by cold and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauterization in this way: apply a large amount of cauterizing agent around the joint, and let the cauterizing oil be applied according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is a gap where you can grip the joint, then apply cauterization to the entire cauterizing agent called "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pain comes from the knees and other joints, and it often occurs, then apply cauterization to each knee with three or four cauterizing agents of each part, to the entire cauterizing oil; and if you have more skill, then do more, but do not hold your hand further than the end of the curved part of the bone.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the groin and back, then administer the cautery that we have mentioned in our chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, make small incisions two lines wide; and if there is no pain at the wrist, make small incisions on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come from the elbow or shoulder, cauterize each part, and give good governance to the patient and many medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you give good governance and purge the humor, it will be healed with the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	of the breaking of a tooth
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When the breaking occurs in anger, and the saliva descends to the mouth and this is unusual, so it is necessary that when you see the tooth broken, do not move it on that day; and use things that draw out the bile, such that the feeling of nausea decreases from his stomach; afterwards make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his jaw until the saliva has returned, and pull them with your fingers, and sign over the break above the bone of the little finger, and at all a sign that is similar to half a circle above the chest; then apply the cautery in this form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	as long as it is white and sheds senselessness.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then remove the mud from its joints; and the ministers stain their hands above so they do not return back; and work well on the thighs at the misalignment, and put disinfectant on him the cussin and the serjant above the thighs, and the other above the lowest that stains his hands; then put the cauterization above the sign of all your hand, and the right and the left as far as you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, start again another until you come close to the bone; and be careful that the mud does not come out when you do the cauterization; that you do not burn it; and that by this the pain does not kill him, or other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And when you do not cut to the bone with the fire cautery, your work is worthless.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And the cauterizer for children should be thin according to their age, and for adults as thick according to their size; after three days care for the wound with butter until the burn is healed; then care for other ailments until it is healthy, and let the hairs grow long on its back until the wound is well-healed; and it should be shaved a long time before going into rooms.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	After forty days, when he wishes to rise, apply a well-made bandage to him for forty more days; and let him have good rest, working little and avoiding too much drinking and eating, and too much noise; and if he follows this instruction, he will be completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will tell you after the cure of cutting into his chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When ruptures come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow anymore, then apply the fire cautery according to its quantity, and let the third part of the wound heal; after the cure according to what we have said; and none of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized with the fire cautery at three angles in this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but the first sign is the shoulder hunch and make a line across the width of the fracture, and another below, and hold your hand to all the cauterizing clamp.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauteries are lighter and less painful.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes in any limb, whether to fall or to be injured, and this pain lasts long, and the medical cure does not help, then it is necessary to cauterize with the cauterizing iron called «poins», and the cauteries should be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and its strength and its location of twists and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If it is not healed with the first cautery, then start another cautery on top of the previous one, as it is customary that it should die to the member that is closest, because it is necessary to make the cauteries until the pain is healed.
de meselerie	I'm sorry, I don't have enough context to provide
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	These are never healed by cauterization with great help, and at the same time the disease that comes from the putrefaction of pus and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	If you see that the cauterization is not healing, take precautions if the disease is at the beginning, and if it has been cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not disappear or stay, and you doubt that the corruption will not spread throughout the pain, then make four cauterizations: I on the forehead, and the other towards the front at the end of the eyebrows; II above the two eyes, and I behind the ears; and leave as much hand as the cauterization comes to the bone, and as much as the scabs come out so that the vapors of the large humors can escape; and cauterize the mouth according to what is in front.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules; et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	And if the infection is spread throughout; and it is obviously present, so you must cauterize with these cautery we have mentioned or chief, and the cauterization is in the lower nose, and two above the spine of the neck, and six above the spine of the back, and one great one and one other below, and two above the shoulders, and two above the elbows, and two above the knees, and one above each joint of the hands and feet, and above the wounds of the hands; and be careful of those that are above the back calcifying, that you do not burn them; and never make any cautery on the bone of the thumb, and one on the bone of the stomach, and one on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And the more you do cauterization, the less you should assist, and it benefits him; and know that the hairs do not feel pain as the healthy ones do, because the body is already corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	It is necessary that the cauterization be large and small according to the members and the joints, as you will find in the ways of iron.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After curing the limb with flour and honey and other cures until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When inflammation comes to any member and is treated with medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not healed, then cauterize the member according to its size and smallness; and let the cauterization be a little within the skin of the cure; then treat the wounds until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And never cauterize the hand, arm, or back with fire, at the end of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus it becomes stiff and swollen; and in any case, do not interfere unless you are knowledgeable about the limbs and their movements.
de albaras	I'm sorry, I don't understand the phrase
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" is awake, and medical treatment is of no use, then cauterize it with a small fire, according to the quantity of the curdled milk, until the swelling is hardened and its color changed; then treat it with flour and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and sand from colon and sand from almond, each in equal parts; and mix them all together, and apply it to the affected area, and bandage it with a cloth, and keep it to the body until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	the treatment of chancre by cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When chancre appears at the beginning, and you see it stop spreading, then cauterize it with a cautery that seems like a circle, all around the edge of the chancre.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And all the wise say that one should also make a cautery in the middle of the chancre; and I do not think it is good because I believe it will become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never seen this happen; and moreover, the better thing is to cauterize around it, with a cautery that is called «circle», as we have said in many cauterizations.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the flea bite that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When anyone has a disease called "adubelati", and it takes a long time to die, either due to the excess it causes or because of the age of the patient when they are elderly (that is, too old) and have little blood, or due to the intensity; then you see it approaching death: therefore cauterize around with many small cauteries by pricking; after leaving it thus.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it will approach death.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it perforated with the entire cauteries, then heat the cauteries in this way:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the middle of this disease called "adubelati" until the cauteries have pierced through, and be such cauteries that the hairs feel afterwards in such a way that the course of the fever is alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the cure until they are completely healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	The cure of fever by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another way of disease is called "corrodens", and it is nothing other than a kind of member, because it twists the members as if the dry reeds did.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in the leg that can suffer cauteries together with fire, then heat the cauteries with a small and large clavile, according to what is needed for the leg or the disease; after cauterizing all parts until you reach all the corruption, and nothing remains of it, so that all that is corrupted is removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then let it rest for three days, and apply a cautery above the wounds with oil until the scars of the fire are removed, and all corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment of burns, wounds arise.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if you see after three days that healthy wounds do not arise, it is good; and if not, if the cautery is applied again above the remaining corrupt parts.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this method has never been treated with medicine in place of the fire cauterization; but the fire cauterization is of greater help, and I have already mentioned the treatment of the medicine in the division: take it when you have the opportunity.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of the pea-like things that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times, these pea-like things come to the feet through defecation, and a disease arises that is called "clos" according to our understanding, and it is a large thing that becomes in the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauteries of this disease are thus in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	It is to say, fire cauterization, and cauterization with hot iron.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Fire cauterization is that you heat the cauterizer like a quill, and it should be made of good iron at the measure that it can penetrate the nail from all parts, and that it has thin margins; afterwards, put it all hot on the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until it reaches the base of the nail; and leave it in this way for three days until it begins to rot; then make an ointment of wild savage herbs boiled with oil, and leave the ointment all night, and the nail will fall off and will be uprooted from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then, treat the joint with heat by applying a hot poultice until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are converted by the previous heat, and often in hands and feet, it is necessary to apply fire cauterization of hot charcoal; and this is done as follows: take an iron nail or iron, or a pen of wood, and place it on the nail and the wart, that is to say, the warts; then put a little hot water, and hold your hand well, and press your hand in turning so that the edge of the nail comes to the root of the nail, and find the hot charcoal deeply through the root; and let the pain of the hot charcoal for an hour; then leave it thus, and it will all come out at its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Then make another one, until you have recovered all those that are in the body, then treat the wounds that generate pus which causes harm.
li cure dou trembler	The cure for trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee; et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When anyone trembles from cold or shivering, or from a quarterly fever or other, it is necessary that you make four cautery burns or four on the backbone; one between each spine; and one on the chest, and one on the stomach at the cautery oil gland; if it allows the trembling, and hastens the recovery from the illness of cold.
des pustules puans	of pus-filled wounds
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	No times appear from previous experiences of a bloated body, or pustules that come from large corrupted matters.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	If it is necessary to do a fire cauterization on each pustule head when they appear: a subtle fire cautery of mullein, with which the point can be grasped in the fire, or from the root of aristolochia long, or with the lenticular cauterization.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And no times do they cauterize at the beginning when they appear, in this way, and it cannot grow more, but is broken down from the excess from which they come, and are healed; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	often occurs great bleeding from the artery that is cut at the wound which comes to the periphery, or to the incision of the abscess, or in burning of the limb, and similar things; and it is a very painful thing to stop.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And whenever this happens to anyone, you must quickly place your second finger on the wound of the vein, and press it very tightly until the blood is no longer coming out, and there is no more dripping; then put the cauteries of olive oil many times small and large as they are all red; then take I, or great or small according to the wound and the limb in which the artery is routed, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and keep the cautery there until the bleeding is stopped.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if you lift the other end of the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, quickly take the other hot cautery that is at the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not stop doing this one after the other until the blood is stopped; and be careful not to burn the nerve that is nearby, and that no other harm comes over the wound; and make sure that when the artery is cut off, it cannot be stopped immediately if the artery is large, unless by one of the four methods that we have mentioned: by cautery, or by extraction when it is not yet treated, or by a very gentle thread, or by medicines placed on which have power to stop blood.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will manage the tightening of ropes or other things burning above, or similar things, does not benefit unless it is done carefully.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone and they do not have any remedy present, they should place their finger index above the wound of the vein as we have said, and tightly bind it until it is tightened above the wound and above the vein; and they should not move it, but keep it cold with cold water often until it is frozen and swollen and tightened; and make inquiries about what they need for cauterizing and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	This is the second book of remedies for tails
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have already told you in the first book of all diseases where it is necessary to cauterize with fire, or with burning medicine, and the symptoms and causes and tools and forms of cauteries; and I will put this chapter of the loins from the head down to the feet, and I will go into this chapter by that same way in order to find more easily what we want.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And therefore when I begin this chapter, it is necessary, dear child, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and for this reason it requires greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	In the work of this chapter, there are often bleedings when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in treating wounds, and extracting arrows, and cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you not to undertake foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many ways of people come for healing.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	If they come from such people who are so with their disease that they die immediately because of the harm they find in their disease, and the greatness of its malice; and of these one must have fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And of these there are those who give you their senses, and say: "Wait, I am in pain"; and the illness is spiteful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It is not necessary to grant permission to those who come to you with this manner, but put greater caution in your honor than in your desire, and do not open foolishly but wisely of that which you are certain and have taken and lost; and use prediction and indication in the treatment of your illnesses for the sake of converting health; and this will help you to gain good reputation, glory, and memory for a long time.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, our Lords give you good understanding and truth, and if you wish to breathe from the holy inspiration of his hand, indeed.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	I have ordered you to study this chapter by comparing it with other chapters on cauteries, as I advised from the beginning to the end, because you will find it easier to understand what you will have to do.
dou chief plein d’aigue	full of sharp
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	This disease often occurs in children when they are being born, and when the baby's head is held too tightly; and sometimes it comes from a reason that one does not know.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	I have never seen this disease except in children, and all those that I have seen died; and therefore it seems to me that it is better to leave the work in the hands of others.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	I saw a child who was suffering from a sharp pain, and the head was swelling each day until it could no longer be borne; and he thought so much of the moisture that he died, and this moisture is gathered outside the bone above the sphenoid, between the skull and the bone; and the works are such if the moisture is between the skull and the bone, and the abscesses are small, then make a wide incision on the head; and let it be as long as our finger, so that the moisture flows; and remove the shape of the spatula.
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more extensive, and the abscess is larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross, like this:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is under the bone, and the signs that you see are the commissures of the neck open on each part, and the sharp pain when you press it with your hand inside, and it does not return: then you must make three cuts in the neck in this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, remove all the moisture.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After closing the cuts with bandages and powders, and applying wine and oil, let it rest for five days; then remove it, and treat the wound with tents and counter-irritants, and keep the neck still, and gradually introduce dry meat without moisture until the member is comfortable and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is that you look at the size of the abscess and the angle of the sharp instrument; for it is never in front, never behind, never on the right, and never on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Therefore cut the abscess where it is open, and fill it with the sharp instrument, and make the incision according to what you can do; and beware that you do not cover the artery; and if blood flows, the hairs may die from the flow of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	of return
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When it happens to someone who has a disease called "cataract" in their eyes or at the base, and the disease is ancient, and the medical treatment does not help much, then the remedy is cauterization with what covers the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	It is therefore necessary, while you look at it, to make the hairs on their head stand; then rub the neck with a rough cloth until the arteries open, then hold the hairs against the cloth; then look where the vein is, and the two are near the ears, and they are not replaced; then sign the two with ink, then cover one and the other with a piece of cloth of two parts, until the wound comes just to the bone, and it should be through the width of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see, push the piece of cloth away from the artery and cover it above, cutting as it should through the middle.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, if blood spurts out continuously from above.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open at the first prick, it is necessary to measure the amount of space between three fingers, then bend and cut into the bone; and the amount of sinew that needs to be removed is six centimeters, and possibly a little more or less depending on what the wound can bear, and the replenishment of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains above the bone point sharp, if the coping that we have applied does not come out, then cover the wound and bind, and the treatment of ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	of the head
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When an old headache comes, and the catarrh is strong, due to the moisture of tears and the heat in the temples and old age and similar things, and it is treated by methods of medical cures and nothing seems to help, then we should cauterize the arteries of the temples and burn, as we have told.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of their extraction is that the hairs of his temples face backwards, and listen to the artery which opens in the temple, because it opens well by its beating, and it is not restored until in some men who are too fat; and if it is restored, then strain the skin with some cloths, then rub the leather with any rough cloth, and raise the leather with hot water until the artery appears clearly; then take the sponge of which this is the shape:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then lightly scrape the skin until you reach the artery, then cut it upwards with pincers, and pull out many threads that are stuck to each part; and if the artery is thin, turn it to the tip of the needle, then cover that part according to the amount of the two injuries.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	But if it is not covered, it will not heal completely.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And draw out blood from the sixth century, just to the third; and if the artery is large, it is necessary to tie it in two places with a strong silk thread that does not allow any blood to come before the scab of the wound, and does not allow any discharge of blood; then cover the excess between the two threads in the same hour, and then, if you see, if the fire cautery is applied just to the bone until the injuries are covered; and this is the best work, if the pains are not feverish and he is of a hot constitution.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the fire cautery, it is used to finish off the moistures: because it is of greater help against moistures.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	When it is necessary for the extraction of arteries, one should fill the wound with old cotton and place dry bandages on top; and when they are removed, one should treat with dry medicines that cause heat to rise, and bandages, until they are healed; and if without cutting the artery as much as you can work, then quickly cover it with a cauterizer, or fill the wound with vinegar and apply it to your hand that the uncut part is not frozen; and if you do not have this present, then place ice on the wound for as long as the uncut part is not frozen, and rise the wound with cold water until it is healed, and it should be kept dry. What is more difficult and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this cauterizer cutting from II parts, but the cutting should be well spaced to last longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	When instruments are too tight, they hold less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus; et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And there should be between the two knives a space of large width, and then when you have marked the two lines, and you melt the iron hot until it comes close to the bone, and cover the vein in two lines; and they should be separated between the two lines because it is not safe from this cauterization at all; and this is the form of the cauterization:
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes are descending from the veins that are above the surface of the head, and it does not improve with medical treatment, and you see the face of the pain twisted, and feels like a tremor; and they are held and moist so that the hair of the papers is soaked, and the papers are crumpled, and burned by the heat of the tears, if it is necessary for this treatment.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And they called the ancient "wound healer," and you should make three cuts evenly along the length of the wound; one of the cuts should be as two teeth below the front, and the others two along the ribs above the bones, and guard against cutting the arteries that are along the ribs above the bones; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the two jaws, and each wound the quantity of three doses across the wound; and have prepared a piece of sponge and much cloth to soak up the blood, then plug the wound with the shape of two parts of which this is:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the incision that is made from the temple to the second incision; and scrape all the skin that is between the two cuts down to the face which is above the bone, then make another cut from the other side of the same incision to the second, and then extract this piece.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If you put the instrument called "cultellaire" in the first cut, it is very sharp on one side and blunt on the other, and this is its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the sharp side of the instrument towards the edge of the skin and the blunt side towards the bone, and push it until it reaches the other cut.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And apply compresses to all the vessels that descend from the head as far as the eyes until the incision is complete up to where the wound opens, and then make another one in the same place on the other side; and then extract the arrow equally, and express the blood for the arrow taken; then put in each incision a piece of old cotton, and put on dressings made of meal and wine and oil and vinegar, and ensure that abscesses do not come; and the next day remove the bandage, and apply a great deal of ground ivy, then the cure of basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other cures as one cures wounds, until they are healed.
dou reume des eulz	The return of the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	Regarding any person who comes for cauterization as usual, and you see the eyes closed and small, and weakened vision, and the papers burned; and the hairs are shaved, and where the shaving is done, there is pain, and the hairs are clogged; consequently, these accidents and that cauterization come from many wounds, and the healing that is, if it is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And it is whether you command the patient to turn his head back, then make a deep cut across the forehead, and another wide in the temple.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And it begins from the temple on the right side to the temple on the left, and let the incision be just to the bone; and move your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move at the sides; and when the bone is exposed, wipe all the blood onto a sponge, and then drain between the two lips of the incision and put old cotton, and linen; then bandage with moistened cloths in wine and oil, and guard against abscess forming; when it is taken out, it is necessary to rub the bone until charcoal begins to form, then care for things that cause excision, which are used to smear char.
En teil maniere: pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of clay, and make a poultice; and administer it in these wounds to apply honey for all.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the stopping of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that which sticks in the ears is one of the four things: grains, or beasts, or stone of the mine or similar things like iron; or seeds, such as lentils, beans, and peas; or things that flow, such as water and milk and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it sticks in the ear stone or other kind of thing that does not stick to the ear, does not grow in the ear, put the ear to the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the arrow, if any amount of purple oil or hemlock oil is poured on it, then proceed with extraction; and this causes the patient to vomit from discomfort, and when they vomit, cover their nostrils, and put pieces of cloth or wool around their ear; and hold the ear upwards.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Many times vomiting occurs from this treatment; and if it does not occur, then proceed with extraction using fine forceps, of which this is the form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it vomits with the forceps, it is good; if not, then proceed with extraction using fine needles of small double thread; and if it does not vomit with these, then make a thin layer of beeswax and put it over the ear or in the opening of the ear canal very thickly so that nothing can enter with the needle; then remove it carefully, for many times vomiting occurs as we have said; and if it does not vomit in this way, then take some gauze and wrap it around the ear, and put any instrument that is sharp at the point to make, and put a little cotton inside; then press the gauze on the arrow or whatever else, and remove it carefully.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if she does not jump from all these things that we have said, then quickly cut through the ear as soon as abscess and blood come out, and spasm; and the manner of the cut is that you first make a small incision in the painful part of the cephalic, and extract the pus according to its virtue, then place the pus between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear where the fat or flesh depends; and the cut should be like a moon, as far as you come to the bone, then remove it according to your ability, and suck it vigorously at your mouth; and the cure until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is small and inflamed, administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, administer the following remedy in a subtle form according to this formula:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and administer an incision of that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not make this mistake when you think the grains are moist due to earwax, until you have made many pieces of it; then extract it with fine tweezers and the succier, as we have said, so that the extraction is aligned.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the case of a grain that gets stuck in the ear, it is necessary to use a stream of warm water and clean the ear thoroughly with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let it lie across the ear itself or where the sharp is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it jumps out because of the sky, that's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If not, take many needles according to the length of your thumb and light ones, and heat them in the fire; and put the hairs of one ear underneath another, and strike with another needle from the other side of the foot, and strike with another needle from above the ear; and do not stop doing this needle after needle until the sharp is completely out, and so it will all come out; and if you see, take the wire, and burn one of the hairs in the ear, and the other hair take with fire until the thinnest wire is melted; then make another wire as we have said in the needle.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of an animal, if it is of small size, as with a mouse and similar things, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is of large size that one can feel, then alleviate extraction with pincers; and it is the lightest thing to remove that is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	When extracting worms in the ears, if you cure them as we have said in the division and treat distillations, and the cure does not help, then it is necessary to look into the ear with sunlight: if there are no worms, then remove them with fine pincers, and if there are none, then take the cotton of this form:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And let it be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And apply the most subtle pressure on the ear according to the amount of pain, then it is often successful for the entire head; do this frequently until all the vertebrae are visible.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not comply, dull the pain around the head with cotton as I have said in the stone; and if they still do not succeed, administer distillations that the ancients have proven effective in the treatment of vertebrae, and you will find them where you can treat distillations; and if you distil your oils and medicines into the ear with this instrument, of which this is the form as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And whether of silver or lead is placed below the small pores, and above the covers to distill; and to press within the distillation with a well-made silver instrument for this purpose, and if you see take the razor and wrap it around the point evenly with cotton; then pour your oil or juice, and what you see from your medicines in the cane, and the cane should be in the ear; then press inside the razor all the cotton, and press your hand temperately until the oil is distilled or slightly out of the ear; and the smell is inside, and the distillations are the little pot heated at the fire just as it is distilled in the ear; and be careful that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be very good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the stupor of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without some sort of hole in their ears; and this same thing happens to men by stupor of wound, or of charred flesh within the ear, and this stupor never comes from inside the ear, unless one cannot see it; and it always comes from outside the ear, and one sees it well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	That which comes from inside the ear, if one cannot see it, is due to great pain in many positions, and in this case where one sees it, one should put the ear towards the sun; and look inside: if you see the opacification apparent, if the work has all this space of because of which this form is:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And so, behind and in front of the ear, so that it does not burst the ear; if the swelling is from the ear or the bone of the ear, then hold it with fine forceps, and the scalpel lightly, until that char is completely removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the swelling is inside the ear, then take a fine scalpel lightly and burn it slightly over the fire, then put it where the bone of the ear is.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the swelling that the patient feels is gritty to hear, lightly pierce, and make sure you do not damage the nerves of the ear; then put in the ear a tent according to the width of the opening, and moisten with Egyptian mummification.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do not apply any bandage until the wound is clean, or take a tent and moisten it with strong rose water, and powder it with vitriol broken into small pieces; and if you see swelling in the ear, then it is advisable to remove the tent and apply another tent made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is removed; then cure it as soon as it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if there is bleeding from the wound, soak a sponge and apply cold cloths, and place it on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the bleeding of blood which are used to treat distillations.
de la char des papieres	of the char of papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This is the method for removing thorns that come from papers when they are wet and dry, if it is necessary to extend them with tweezers and pincers, and the tip of a glass from their roots; then place on the wound vitreous powder.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if without decortication, the patient is cauterized with a fine lens-shaped cauterizer, and the cauterizer after the incision is suitable; and often they recur, nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	For the gravel
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times in papers come things that seem like gravel in their form and hardness, and because of this disease is called "hail," and it is an assembly of moisture large on the paper above and below; the work is such: if the hail moves from one part to another, and it is a light thing to know; then make it wide, then scrape each part lightly, then take it with pincers, and cover it.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you do not cover it with a thin layer of paper, it does not hurt the patient; and if the pressure is great, it assembles at one seam, and the cure until it is healthy; and if it is small, do not force it, because the pains will restore soon and injure.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the splinter is falling downwards into the inner part of the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper, and put the splinter into some tweezers, and hold it with a cloth on both sides; and if the paper is moved by incision, it does not hurt anything; and when the splinter is removed, pour in some vinegar oil until the wound is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Exinach is a fat that is smeared on papers above, and it has more in children than in adults, and it hurts their eyes, and they vomit it in the morning, and they cannot look at the light of the sun because their tears stick to their eyes; and because they lie on their faces, they sleep on their backs, and their papers are outside their eyelids moist with exinach that has dissolved into oil.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the limb to your touch and feel the excruciation between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the method of the work is such that the painful part is placed on your hand; then take a cloth of linen, and make a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that contains excruciation from each part, then place it over it; and press on one side and the other, so that the excruciation is assembled within the circle; then, with a sharp spatula, cut a slit of a certain width, and not larger than the wound on the vein; and cut the skin until you come to the excruciation; and in many positions, excruciation comes from the slit, in the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Extract the bandage from all around the piece of cloth between your two hands, and turn your hand to the right and left as much as possible; and be careful not to insert it into the wound, that you do not come to the whole length of the oil, that you do not hurt it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if it does not insert at the beginning of the wound, slightly push the wound as we have said; then extract it as we have said, then wipe off cloths in oil and vinegar, and put on the limb, and bind it tightly.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such people who bite and put on to corrupt the moisture that is remaining.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the healer as long as they are healthy.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it comes to the limb with an abscess, then the healer should apply ointments until they are healthy.
des poilz des papieres	of hairs of papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc IIII manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When in papers hairs are born not according to nature, and are awake, they harm the eyes, and bring on various diseases such as tears and softening of the papers and corneal, until it is the cause of destruction of the eyes; and the cure is according to four methods: either by cauterization with fire, or by medicine cold according to what is before or in the chapter of cauterization, and is done either by incision and stitching or by cauterizing, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you place the head of the painful part in your hand, then return the paper of oil to your right hand; if it is converted, it is good; if not, if there is an needle at the end of all the thread; and so it is above the margin of the paper or where the hair grows among these hairs, and pull the thread above the paper, and return it to the razor; then in the part outside the paper, outside the hairs adjusted, all the skin from the big toe to the small one; then pull the thread, and place outside the paper a small tent of cotton and linen, then above the paper a figure of a bandage, like the foot of a mullet, and in all cases it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you saw lift the paper which is divided to all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	If you have skill in handling great quantities of paper according to how the paper is softened; then make all the spatula above the two lines that you have signed, and begin from the greatest arm down to the smallest; and let one of the wounds be near the natural hairs at the base of the root, then cut the thread in one of the two angles of the needle, then scrape the skin; then bring together the two lips to a seam of an needle all along the thread of fine silk, and suck the blood, and dry the superfluity of the threads above the two sides of any things gluing, if you see that you make it; and if not, if you do not have care for it, then leave the seam and the threads near three or four days; then cure the wound without seams of things dried and constricted, because the paper revives at the moment of the wound and its assemblement, but the seam is dry (as they say of the ancients), and it is work without fear; and if in another way: and that you sign the paper of a figure which is as equal to the shape of the mirror, as we have said, at three threads according to the form that is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then apply this remedy with small equal forces according to the form that is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you cannot hold the needles, and the thing is not even, take a needle or if it has a thread, put the thread in the shape; and the other thread over the big arm, and the second thread over the small one, and assemble the threads equally; then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin where you have marked, as we have counted, then assemble the two lips of the wound by sewing, and cure it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with carron oil and similar soothing ointments; and never once has the hair of the skin been converted: if you use what we have said about the incision, but the sewing on one and the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The care of dogs is as follows: and it is that you convert the paper and the needle inside according to what I have said, and then make two dogs by art, and two fine lines as long as the paper and the width of the space is; and cope with the two parts where you hold the threads; then bring together the one and the other subtly above what covers the paper of the oil, and strain the two dogs from the two parts form; and leave it in this way for some time, and the skin that was stretched will die and rot and putrefy, until it falls off by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it lingers, if the copper has some strength, then cure it until it is healed; and when the wound has been dressed, and if it has been lifted off the paper, and they will not grow back the hair; and this is the form of the two cains that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The work is such that you grasp a thin needle, and draw out the silk thread softly and thinly; then assemble the hairs and pull them gently, and let the lengths of the threads be one palm long; then order the other thin silk thread briefly, and pull the heads of the hairs together; then place the hairs on your skin so that the work is hidden, for it is a thin and delicate work, then draw the needle through the entire length of the hair rooted, and pierce it into the paper gently until you remove it from the natural hair; then pull the hair up to the top of the work, and pull in the work that hair, if there is one or two or three or more; then pull your hand so that the hairs come out entirely on the paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	If the bone is treated and the hair does not come with it, then treat the bone with the oil until it comes out completely and you can see it through the vision of the oil; then take the bone and the oil, and close it and let it sit for two or three days, until the hair grows back in its place and heals; and if the hair is small, accompany it with one long hair from the goats naturally, and raise it with that one until it is lengthened and then lift it.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the preparation of the oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease, which is called "aleacrati" or the preparation of the oil, comes from the oil, there are two ways: one natural and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens by wounding, or by cutting or by cauterization, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the way of the work in it is that you break that suture, and dry the edges of it, and put in tents of linen, and tie it until it is healed; and it is only necessary to use in its treatment things that dry and constrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, the disease will become worse than before; but in the work of things that are softening, such as fenugreek; and the rose of bitter or strong and seeds of linseed should be cooked, and wet with any of the oils, and it is wrapped in a tent, and the treatment of this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasures of your knowledge are that you should take care that it does not become misshapen like before; and this work that we have said is no more than an introduction to this disease, that it does not return in the same form as before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the oil that comes in the fat
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease that is truly called "axacrati", and is both natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accidental comes from wounds and cuts and cauterization and similar things; and the way of the work is that you grasp an needle, in which it has double thread, and the char in the fat, and make it pierce from the right arm to the left, so that the thread comes out at both ends; then the char is placed above all the needle, and the covering is wide.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the shape of the paper returns according to what it should be, it is good; if not, take a razor and put it in the incision, and return the paper, and make two incisions where the cost of the paper is; and let the ones who have the two incisions at the angles of the incision that you have cut, and make an angle so that when they are assembled, the shape is as if it were a letter that has no «Greek»; then take that char, according to the quantity that its cost is away from, of what teaches the paper, then add the two missing parts, and tie them with a thread of linen; then care for what we have said about medicines that soften, and tents, until they are healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	If the illness comes from a cut or a stitch or a cauterization, it is necessary that you make a plain cut outside of the hairs and papers, as I have said; then squeeze between the two layers of a tent, as I have said; and one must do the work according to the form of the illness, for it is very different in form, and the wise masters compare all things possible to know how they can bring the figure back to its natural form; and the patients themselves, according to what is necessary for work and tools in many dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	of the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this stitching is done by many people in a partly manner, where the paper above is glued with the white of the oil, and it cannot move or do its natural workings, then you must go outside the paper with the point of a razor, and lift it up; and stretch it with pincers, until you cut away what is hard to the subtle spatula, which should not be too sharp nor too thin, so that the pain does not suffer from the spatula being too sharp or burning the oil; and let your incision, from which you scrape off this assembly, be lightly, so that the paper returns to its natural form; and all this assembly is healed, and nothing is ever put into hot salted oil, and lifted out of cool sweet wine, and colloid; then place between the paper and the oil a linen tent, and put on top of the oil moillie wool in abundance of urine; and after the wound is healed use the colloid and other things until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the elbow joint
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	There are two types of elbow joints: one is nervous and resembles a hard, thick skin, and the other is not nervous but resembles frozen white moisture, which when touched with iron and heated with tongs and pincers, cannot be removed; and both start near the large arm and grow slowly until they cover the entire eye and light and movement of the oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the way of the incision is that the hairs put their head in your hand, then open the eyes; and lift the paper to your hand, then bend the elbow with pincers of small double, and put it above; then take a needle, and put the hair of a horse, or a goat, or a cow, and the thread strong; and double the point of the needle a little and insert it into the elbow, and push the thread through the entire needle, and tie the elbow with a thread and put it above, and scrape all the hair on the side of the elbow that shows the prunello and the silk to the hair just above, then cut the remaining at the root of the arm to all the subtle spatula and with small forces, and leave the natural skin of the arm, so that by the incision does not come the usual tears from the eyes; and once it has been extended only to the elbow, and the thread, as we have said; then scrape on all the soft spatula of which this is the form:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be careful that the spatula does not touch the intestines and break them, and that the scalpel is not perforated; and after the incision pour a little bit of broken silk thread oil, and a collar made of litharge, and leave it just above the other side; then care for what needs to be done until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the needle is not nervous, and you cannot insert the needle, and the needles cannot enter, often this resemblance of a needle of medicines; and they are born as I have told in the division, and if you see it covered, then apply oil to the pain, and take the spatula lightly poured according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And gently rub the joint above, and if you see that it does not ease and the pain increases, then blow into a bowl of litharge colloid and red colloid and beaten silk, and dampen the oil with the other side; then continue the other work according to this same method, until it is completely healed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary in the oil, as if an abscess bursts, then milk it, and cure the abscess until it is healed, then continue the work as before, until it is completely healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh on the arm is black due to great harm, then soak it in oil at night, and apply a part and not all at once, so that tears do not come; then pour in the oil a red powder made from litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that arises above the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Some men never have red flesh arise, and covers the pupil and restrains it above the papers and turns it to the side, and seems like a baluster rose; and if the work is that the hairs put their head in your safe, then work the ears, and cut all that flesh with suitable notches for this, and support it with force; then cover the first flesh, and go through scraping to the end, and make sure you do not bleed the oil at the work; and let the incision of the spanworm that we have said in the incision of the finger and as small forces of which one takes the base, as the form after this chapter demonstrates; and when the incision is completed and all the flesh is removed, then use the oil of silk broiled or you distill red powder and similar corrosive medicines, and put on the oil afterwards with cotton with absinth, so that it is assured of no aposteme; and if nothing remains, and the swelling disappears, and you doubt aposteme, then leave the oil and cure the aposteme with calming remedies aposteme; then return to your work until it is healed, and thus make many flesh is boiled in the oil by this appearance.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But it is necessary that you alleviate the care of each weak part of the natural way; and of the accidental way, in the work of iron; and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that this member is suffering from that work.
des voines des eulz	of the eyes' veins
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	are red veins that are covered above the oil, and take away from the sight their work and weaken the oil always.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Therefore, the work is first that you look at this oil, in which those veins are, and outside, and there is no other disease besides that one; then the work in such a way: command the patient to put his head in your healthy place, then suspend those veins all around according to their wisdom, and let the threads be subtle double according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be two openings made in one breast according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then gently apply those veins subtly, and stop the blood flow an hour after another, until you can remove those veins far from the oil; and guard that you do not pierce the oil with points of the spatulas, and do this work at noon in front of the sun, and be very hot in your work so that you do not cover those veins; and when you have done this, distill green and red wine into the oil to corrupt what remains of the previous.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot collect all the blood in that hour, then apply a plaster on top of the oil with things that ease the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some time until the pain is eased and it is ensured that there is no abscess, then continue according to this method as long as it is safe; and this is the form of the forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the oil fistula
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The mirror calls this "arissati" fistula: when you cure it with fire and medicine as I have said before, and it is not healed, then you must cut into the abscess where it should die, and drain all the moisture that is there, until the bone is revealed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is revealed, and you see the corruption and the blackness, then you should remove all the instruments that are in its form; it is called "rough head", and it should be made of iron from the same place as the original, and it should not be pointed like a lime as it is in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place above the broken bone of the limb, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a little until you feel that corruption is removed; and do this once, then restore the broken bone with drying agents.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the joint is swollen, and there is heat in the body, and the body of the bone is swollen, and it remains thus for forty days, and it does not recover and is not healed, and no bad accidents come, remove it when it is healthy; if not, there is no other remedy than to return the fistula to the opening of the sinus according to this form: and you should uncover the bone the second time by fire, and by wetting agents, and when it goes out uncovered, take the foret according to this form, and let the iron be at three angles, and let the fust be attenuated just to the top as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place it above the bone of the arm, and keep your hand away from the oil and the needle, then turn the forearm until it pierces the bone and you feel the pain because if he holds his hand on his elbow; and when the limb has been treated with dry medicines as I have indicated, and when the char heals and the bones harden, then apply the matter to the elbow; it is a lighter thing for the pain.
de l’issue de l’oil	from the end of the oil
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes open wide and do not close, and it does not dislocate at the elbow, then you must bandage the pain; then clean it, then apply leeches or a heated poultice to draw out the pus, then put on the oil mixed with acid, aloe, incense, and sarccol, and then strain the oil and apply it with bandages and cloths; the manner of the cloths is that you take cloths that are soft enough, double them into fourths, and place one on top of the other according to the quantity needed; then strain it through a durable cloth, and start again with the leeches to draw out the pus without hurting; then remove the leeches and let the oil stay on for day and night, and if the swelling does not disappear, it is necessary to strain it well; then remove the poultice after the next day and night, and if you see the oil return to its original state, it is good; if not, start again with the bandages, cloths, poultice, and leeches until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	forced detachment of a vein
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions occur in the vein, then open it, and come out with forceps like a piece of resin, and is easily seen; if you see it covered, the work is such that you drive a needle into the root of the part below this above, then drive another needle or double the thickness of the part of the arm; and pierce it, and let the first needle according to its position; then cover the part of the double thread with the skin, and hold it firmly, then remove the needle and put fresh oil on the wound, and leave it until the thread has healed with the vein, then care for the wound with comforting things until the wound is healed; and never cover the wound with a piece of cloth from each part of a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes appear greatly displaced, prick them with a fine needle that comes from under the oil, and draw out the moisture and wipe the eyelids, and enter thus immediately; then extract it as much as is necessary to make them healthy.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the spoon of oil
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease which is called "alcunnati" is nothing more than a drop of oil that is assembled in the oil, resembling a sharp descending arrow, and this is not really sharp; and the way of its appearance in the work is such that you make the patient sit with the evil above the seat, and straight, then take the head between your hands from two parts, and move the mover until you see the drop coming up to your eyes; then it should be finished, and not wiped off and not dissolved, and see the things as they were; and if it does not descend, it is not arranged as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you let the pain rest between your hands, then take the thin spatula and make it over the corneal thread and the continuation of the conjunctive with the corneal thread and the crown, until the arrow is out; and when it is out, then pour hot oil mixed with honey or mustard boiled and honey, then be cured of other cures until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	of the hot oils
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have similar cases in the division, and what is needed to pierce; if it works according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	It is necessary that you make the pain rest between your hands crossed, outside of the light for the sun, and with the healthy oil and pressed very tight; then put the paper of the oil to your right hand if the eyes are on the left, or to your left hand if the eyes are on the right; then take in your right hand if the eyes are on the left, the instrument called «almagda», or in your left hand if the eyes are on the right; then put the point of the instrument over the crown by the thickness of a hair in that part of the oil that is in the blind spot of the eye, then press the instrument called «almagda» vigorously, and restore your hand as long as it pierces into the part of the oil, and feel that almagda comes to the empty thing; and it is necessary that the measure of the way almagda is at the beginning of the space that is from the gold to the end of the needle; and this is the crown of the oil; if you see the bone in that paper for the clarity of the corneal thread, and then put the instrument above or the hot oil.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If he feels sharp pain now, he sees the hairs in front of him and the instrument in his eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After resting a little, and if the sharp pain returns, put the feather with the instrument, and when it is well secured and does not rise, gently twist slightly around your hand back and forth; then put a little cotton on the eye and leave it inside.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then put in place the eye drop or some soft cloth soaked in red wine and plenty of honey, and tie it with clean oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Now, and those who are from our own group, put on top with plenty of honey.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if it cannot enter the oil due to its hardness, because there are some men who have very hard eyes, then you must use the tool called "alberit", of which this is the form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	Therefore pierce only the conjunctive, and do not move it too much in the front, but make the eye subtle, then beat the hardness, as we have said; and at the completion of the work compare to the pain that arises, in which it sleeps on its back in the dark place; and be careful of all movements, and take light foods, and do not move his head to the right or to the left, and be tied according to its disposition just after this day; then release him in this same dark house, and examine his vision, and see some things, and then return the thread just after six days; and it is not necessary that you make the cure now, but it is necessary that you raise him, because the sharp increase is quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	When abscesses come, you should apply warm oil before the seventh hour, and it should be rubbed with what appeases the abscess; and when it is appeased, remove the cloth and place on its face a cold compress to cover any opening, and let it stay in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then gradually increase the time spent outside and convert it into its usual activities; and make sure that no disciples should interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	Some came to us who were in the Yrach, who told us that in some countries people often cut themselves with sharp instruments, because of which the wounds become infected, but I have never seen any in our land, nor have I read about it in books of the ancients; perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the similarities of the forms of amalgams, because those who do not know them see them as such; and they are made of pure tin.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And the main part of them is of the same fineness, and the other in three angles ash.
de la char sor le neis	of the herb for the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	Never do noses or nostrils bear different amalgams, because there are some that seem like scorpions at the tip of the nose; and if there is such an amalgam or it has a dark color, and if the amalgam has a good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In those amalgams that are good and not enhanced, it is necessary that you make the pain between your hands against the sun; and work its nostrils, and pour the liquid of those amalgams, and take them out; because it is enough that you can hold in the thin and sharp substance of one part, until you know that that amalgam is all dissolved.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there is nothing left that can be removed, then open it with all the subtle and light instruments, so that nothing remains; and if it is a pus-filled abscess, wipe it clean as it should be; and if it is malignant abscesses, hurry and cauterize it until the wound is not stained and all the pus is removed. Then pour out or rinse with warm water and vinegar.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If it does not open and moisture comes into the palate, make sure it is healthy; and if moisture does not penetrate as it should, make sure there is a bone in the jaw above, because the instruments do not come out to cut: therefore, you must go with a thin piece of linen, and hold it with both hands, and leave space between each nut as much or little; and put the painful teeth of the thread in its gum to the side, and pull out as far as it comes through the jaw inside the mouth; many times they do this with children at school, and it is an easy thing for someone who wants to do it; then hold the jaw that comes out of the jaw with one hand, and the other jaw that comes out of the mouth with the other hand, and make them as we are who are or thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Do this until you see that they have not corrupted that part of the flesh, then remove the filth, soak in salt, and wash the thread in an Egyptian method, and put it back in its place as before; do this three times or more, until the thread has eaten away everything that remains of the flesh; and then put a plaster on the wound for several days until it is healed, and if there is need of drying medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument for purging the head, by which one distills oils and medicines into the wound:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And it should be of silver or tin, resembling an open lamp, like a dog, and conduct it thus; and if you see, if make a closed dog, and it is the instruments plain to purge the head; and have one hand at the head for holding when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	for the sinew of the neck
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Often a disease arises at the head of the neck that is called "telul", and grows and becomes large over time; and for this reason it is necessary to cover it at the beginning, and remove all the bone, then put the cautery or the burning medicine on the wound; and if it is difficult to cover it until it is large, if it is hard, of poor color, and has poor sensation: if you do not touch it with iron because it is an abscess, for when it is covered once, great harm comes to the pain; and if the abscess is softly touched, not with poor color, and you see that it can be completely covered, then remove the pain and the covering without fear, and cure the wound of similar and restrictive things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the bone is cut and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	If solutions of continuity come from one of these cartilages, it is of little use, since in any man.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, if the wound is fresh and full of blood, and then the lips are sewn together at a seam, then treat it until it is healed; and if the lips are already decayed on one side and the other, then you must scorch all the parts of their edges until they heal, then bring together both lips at a seam, and bind them, and powder with powder of dragon’s blood, and broken incense; and put the powders on a piece of strong or other plaster, and let it soak through him, then treat the wound until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The way of the stitching is such that you gather the solution: either by needles, as we have said in the stitching of the abdomen; or by thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	Sometimes there are abscesses inside the lips, hard and small or large; therefore it is necessary to turn out the lips, and cut across each part, and take the pincers and scrape in every part; then fill the wound after the incision with ground glass broken, until the wound is no longer bleeding; then apply a poultice of bran, and cure the wound of dry things until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	of the teeth gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	often appear above the gums charred, which the ancients called "albulus"; it is necessary to hold it with pincers, and cover its root, and let the blood or the pus flow; then put on the tooth vitriol crushed, or other powders that are astringent and desiccants; and if this char returns after the incision, and often does, then cover it again, and cauterize: if it does not return after the cautery; and these are the forms of instruments to cover.
des sordens	of the deaf
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes they are assembled at the top of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, scars that are ugly and sharp; and sometimes they are black and yellow and green, until the corruption comes to the gum, and they are black and smelly; it is necessary to place the bad breath between your hands, and its teeth should be in your holy, and remove the teeth or the scars that appear, until nothing remains; and thus make the black and green, and yellow and other stains, until they are cleaned; and if what is taken at the first level, it is good; if not, start again on the second day and the tool, until you have removed everything; and wipe off that the teeth have business with various forms of instruments to remove, because the tool that removes them from under the teeth has other shapes than those that remove between the teeth; and these forms and others should be prepared with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when treating a toothache that you delay pulling it as long as possible, for no one should do this; for it is a substance very high and therefore we have no excuse to remove it.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Then when the pain is constrained to pull, then you must be certain of the tooth wailing.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Often the pain of the tooth is relieved, and one must be careful that it is not a holy tooth, and pull the good tooth; and all the time do not let the pain depart until the evil is extracted, for we have already done this to these saints; and when you are certain of the aching tooth, then you must burn around the tooth at all points; then move it with your fingers or subtle forceps at first and first, until it is well dislodged, then firmly fix the forceps; and let the patient hold the pain in their holy place between their teeth, and keep it so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After straightening the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not jump back into place, take one of these tools and gently push it into each part lightly, and move it as you did first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the tooth is cracked and damaged, it is necessary to fill it with cloths where the pulps are; and if the straightening is subtly with nails, that it does not break when being straightened; and it is very important to cover around the gum to relieve the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And be careful not to break it, and that a part remains, and again give the pain by the greater evil of the root more severe pains from the first.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And beware that you do not act in such a manner as the ignorant sainors do, who, by their haste and boldness, break the chariot at once, and never bring back what we have told; but they bring forth once upon a time through the root of this great disease because of the roots that they delay, or because of the chariot that they break, as often as we have seen; and when the dense is drawn, if blood comes out, which often happens, then use the wound with wine or vinegar and silk; and if it does not stop, then use the wound with vitriol broth; and if it does not work, then cauterize.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the instruments, by which one moves the first tooth, should be long pointed and large handed, so they do not bend when you pull the tooth; and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should be large bodies so they do not bend when pulling, and they should be made of good iron, and they should be sharp to hold the tooth.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the tooth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains when pulling, then you must put a soft cotton ball on the tooth to hold it.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	so that the tooth is softened, then push the pliers called "alligator", of which the patient seems like a beak; and they should be made inside like a lime and this is the form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	If the roots do not want to come out at all these needles, then it is necessary that you dig around the root completely, and put the instrument called "althali", which is a spatula, of which this is the form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And it should be both large and thick so that it does not break easily, and if the root jumps out of the ground, it is good; if not, with all the instruments, of which the forms come hereafter:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you use this instrument that has two prongs, of which this is the form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other instruments that are before in the region of the teeth, and with this instrument that looks like large needles, of which this is the form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And these instruments are used except that they cannot break, and many of them are made of dense materials; and also other instruments, which I do not count; and the wise masters find their own instrument, according to what their works and the disease show them, because there are some diseases where the ancients did not teach the use of an instrument due to the diversity of them and if they have broken the chariot or other bones, or if it hurts, if they seek the instruments that they need, as I have said, and help with gestures, of which this is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And be large and well holding to hold the bone, that it not escape, but it can hold and remove; then restore the limb of medicines fitting for this, and if there is putrefaction in the bone, and it is small, if the doctor has all this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not according to the natural course, and the shape is ugly, and specifically in young women, it is necessary that you remove if the tooth is not aligned after the tooth, and it is not in the right place, and no one can be made or smoothed: then the ray; and if it is with the tooth, take this instrument that is like a small beak, and is similar to a sharp iron in some:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the copper pot slowly and slowly in your hands for the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that you can remove it, then the lime from one piece of lime as follows is the form:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	And it is also like the lime of which one makes the arrows; and in lime the tooth slowly and slowly in your hands gently, so that it does not move until it crumbles; then the plane at the end to any razor, and if the tooth is too sharp and it bleeds the tongue, then you must remove the roughness as long as it is even, so that it does not bleed the tongue nor corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the teeth ache
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the teeth in front ache, or by percussion or falling, and the pain cannot be relieved by pressing on the gums to prevent them from grinding, and you treat them with restrictive medicines, it does not work; then you must use a gold wire, because silver wire becomes green and rots, but gold never changes; and let the wire be neither too thin nor too thick, according to the quantity of the space between the teeth; and if you see that the teeth are close together, take the wire and double it between the two healthy teeth, then put the affected tooth between the healthy ones, as many times as necessary, until you can feel wisely against the healthy tooth on the other side; then start the covering again from the part where you started, and gently and skillfully press your hand, until it does not move; and let your fingers be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then, tie the loose teeth with a thin thread to a needle, and gather them together, and place them between the healthy tooth and the gum, so that it does not bleed the tongue; then leave it tight as long as it can hold, and if it slips out, or the thread breaks, then tie it with another thread; if it holds, it will serve in this way for a long time, and this is the form of the teeth and the shape of the filling of the two healthy teeth, and the two missing ones, as you see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth breaks, if it is reset in its place, from fresh to fresh, as we have said; and does not interfere with any that is wise and suffering, and is never made into the shape of a cow's tooth, and it is placed in the place of the defect, and it is tied on as we have said, and holds, and serves in this way for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	to cut the tongue's ligament
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	Never is this ligament that comes from the tongue or naturally, which one should cut in such a way as to open the mouth of the wound, and hold the head in its place, and lift the tongue; then cut the nervous ligament widely, until the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there is hardness or no outlet, and it is from a deep wound, if you boil the linen and cut widely, gently; and be careful that the wound is not too large, for the artery that is outside; and when you have done, lift the tongue with a sponge of rose or cold water, then place a tent of linen on the tongue every night, so that the wounds cannot heal.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	If there is bleeding from the vein, put vinegar on the wound; and if it does not stop, then cauterize it with a slow-burning fire brand, which is good for the skin; then treat the wound with other remedies until it heals.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you see that the wound is of a dark or black color and hard, and the patient does not feel pain, do not touch it, for it is chancre; and if it is inclined to suppurate and there is moisture, pour water through a thin spout, and deliver from both sides; and if it does not stop bleeding at your work, put vinegar on it until it stops bleeding, then return to your work until you have removed all the blood; then lift up the wound with silk and cotton, and treat it with other remedies until it heals.
des apostemes de la gorge	of throat abscesses
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	There are no abscesses in the throat called "godath", and they are properly called the II mandibles, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and if they are not healed, then be careful: if it is an abscess hard of small size and of yellow color, do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, also for the running of blood; but leave it until it is soft, and then you will break it open, or it will break by itself; and if it is of white color and the root is thin, have prepared the instrument to cover, but first check if the abscess has calmed down and is quiet.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Then place the painful part in front of the sun, and its joint should be in a straight position, and the worker's mouth and the sergeant's hand between his hands, and press the tongue away from all the instrument, of which this is the form; and it should be of silver or thin brass like some knives:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	If you press the tongue against all this instrument, and you see the abscess, take the needle and the hook in the amber, and draw it out above as much as you can; and take nothing from the cloth with it, then cover the instrument, of which this is the form, that seems like forceps; and the chief are bent, and one end is sharp, and very sharp, and it is made of iron or steel:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, use a pair of pliers, with which it has the following form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And on one side, it is sharp, and on the other side, blunt; and when you have removed one of the arrows, remove the other in the same manner, and after the incision gargle the sharp parts with hot, sharp, and salty water, and if blood comes out, gargle the sharp parts with hot water, or crushed pomegranate skins, or wormwood, and similar things, until the wound is clean; then cure it as much as possible; and never other abscesses come out of the throat except the two arrows, so remove them in the same way as the two arrows.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman with an abscess that was swollen inside her throat, namely a small abscess; and she had almost completely closed her throat, so that the woman could not breathe or eat or drink, and died if she remained like this for a day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so large that it had been punctured twice through the two nostrils.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I therefore quickly and inserted it into the one nostril, then removed the pus through the other nostril, and a large portion of blood; then I refilled it again through the other nostril, and pressed the tongue against the mouth; afterwards, I inserted the needle into this abscess, and sucked out a part, and did not remove any more than a small amount of blood; and thus the woman was able to breathe again, and began to drink water and then wine, and did not stop cutting away at this abscess for a long time; the abscess kept growing back, and filled up the cavity that I had emptied, so that it became very large; therefore, I inserted and cauterized it inside her throat: thus she did not grow any more; and I left these parts, and only God knows what happened to her afterwards.
de l’uve	of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When applying to the eye, and it is swollen and long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is not too large and round, it is called "eye".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help much, and you see that the patient's abscess is calm, and it is subtle, then you must cover it; and the one that is round and not too long; and if it is bloody or dark red, then you must avoid incision of the li.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger over the pain.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Therefore, when you see it, according to the method that I have mentioned, of its blench and length, you should make the hairs sit in front of the sun, and press the tongue against the instrument that we have mentioned earlier; then cut the opening in the eye, and remove it, and treat it with one or two of the instruments that I mentioned in the incision of the two arrows.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And it is necessary that you only cover the excess which is outside of the natural limit; for if you cover more, it will cause great pain to the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have mentioned in the incision of the two arrows, and treat it until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the pain is too severe, then it is necessary to use an engine for the cauterization of the sensitive area.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of the cautery is sharp and hot.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And the patient puts his head on your sound shoulder, and then presses his tongue against the instrument that we have said in the chapter of cauterization, and confis with very hot water, so that it is not too thick or too clear; and by the movement of this instrument, which is in the form:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the patient has a hair or something to put the medicine on, like the movement of a spoon, and puts the instrument all the medicine over the wound; and the patient lies down on his side, so that the saliva and the mucus flows from his mouth into the medicine inside, so that it does not drip to the throat and the blood; then hold your hand to all the medicine and press it over the wound, for a quantity of half an hour, until you see the benefit and the medications of the medicine are calmed; and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and blow the instrument all the cotton into the wound above, until the cotton is burned over the wound; and do this often, until the cauterization of the medicine is perfect, then let it dry for four or five days, and if you have the ability to start again with the cauterization of the medicine, and start again, and after the cauterization, smear it around the wound with cotton soaked in butter, and clean what is around the medicine; and be wrapped in hot water, and be treated with gargles until they are healthy.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is more saved from the incision than from the cauterization; if it is cured by fumigation in this manner, take chamomile and hyssop and origanum and rue and camomile and similar herbs, and put them all or some of them in a pot, and put honey in it, and make it boil; and the pot should be well sealed with strong earth, and inside the pot have an instrument like this:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And it should be of silver or lead, and it should be one of the prongs stuck in the mouth of the patient until the vapor rises to the boil through the nose, until the boil is dead; afterwards, do it repeatedly until the boil dries, and make sure you do not apply this at the beginning of the onset of the abscess chaut, for many things happen; and do not make this unless at the decline of the abscess chaut.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, take a cloth and put it inside the head, so that the tongue does not stick out too much; for the cloth does not make the vapor heavy on the tongue, and it is good cure together with safety.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times it is found in the throat or fish bones or nothing; therefore you must take out what you can see, and press the tongue against the sun at all instruments, so that you can see the thing; and what does not open itself and is returned to the throat, you must make vomit the bad thing as soon as the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps if the thing is stuck by vomiting; or the bad things swallowed a piece of sponge, or a piece of naval, or a lettuce root, or a small piece of dry bread; and tie the sponge to the string, and then swallow it; and when it comes back to the throat, it will stick, and then pull out; and if it does not come out as we have said, take the instrument according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And the crooked instruments should be curved to the head so that they can more easily enter the throat, and the head should be raised high; and guard that you do not touch the epiglottis, that the whole does not come, or do not push the bone inside; and it is better that the hairs push the instrument, for it is softer or the thing is as such; if it goes down, or it pulls the entire instrument evenly, as far as it is full.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the throat sinew
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	The throat sinew is not medicine, as I said in the division, by the care of medicines; and if it does not help, then look at the hairs in the throat to the sun, then press the tongue against the instrument that I have told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the sinew, then it is to be cut with a small knife, or with sharp needles that are equal to the size of a needle.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if the needle does not work, then take a hair from your head, and push it into the wound of the sinew, then push or move the hair with the sharp iron, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the wound is infected throughout the day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take full of cold water, and open the mouth, and pour it in the direction of swallowing, and move it to your hand often; and when the sinew feels the cold, then it breaks.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	If it does not stain as we have said, then smoke the wound with asafetida, using the instrument I mentioned in the fumigation of the grape; do this many times, for it will stop without scarring.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	The way of the fumigation is that you hold a pot or vessel with charcoal in it, and place a cover over it perforated in the middle, and in this puncture place the instrument; then pour your fumigation, and put the wound at the end of the tube in its mouth, and close its mouth, so that the fume does not escape but goes directly to the wound; and the wound will now heal, and if it does not, then repeat the fumigation many times; and let the patient suffer thirst, and eat salted things and others, and do not drink water; and thus it is necessary that the wound heals by this treatment.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument used to treat the jaw, so that when it can be seen, it resembles a crowbar to enter the throat; and it has the appearance of a care beak, and there is roughness like lime, so that whatever it takes, it cannot slip.
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapters on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	There are many kinds of abscesses, according to what the memory comes after one and another in this book, and they differ in puncturing and cutting; and it is in two ways that one is in its own shape itself, and because it holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second method is for those who are at the waist.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	Because the abscesses of the chief are different from those of the foundation, and the abscesses of the elbow are different from those that come in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if there are abscesses that one should not pierce until the boil is completely dead; and if there are such as it is necessary to pierce when they are ripe, and do not die immediately after their completion, like abscesses that are beyond joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	Because when abscesses come beyond joints, and it is left until it is swollen all around, perhaps the tendon and the nerve of the joint are corrupted, by which it is the cause of contraction in that member.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	When the abscess is located away from the main limb, and if you delay perforation until it dies, it will harm the main limb; or if it is located away from the base, if you pierce it too soon, it will kill; and it should only be pierced when the abscess has been crushed and digestion is completed, except for that which is located away from the base, so it cannot protrude and remain alongside, and a fistula forms; and it cannot be healed in a short time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it is necessary to remove the pus from the perforation of the abscess that has died according to the completion, and this is when the pain is relieved, and the departure of the fever, and the lessening of the pain and the swelling, and the lessening of the debatement and the lessening of the main part of the abscess, and the other signs; and it is necessary to make the perforation lower down the limb where the pus is most apparent; and let the perforation be along the length of the body, and if the abscess is near the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all these places equally where there is no pus.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In these cases, according to the affected limb.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when abscesses are in the limb, it is better to leave the incision until it is confirmed that digestion has been completed, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you prick it beforehand, the blood vessel of the limb will follow along with it, and it is stained with much dirt; and perhaps the lips harden and pierce through it.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if any abscess that is pricked according to the wide blood vessel, as the limb has need of it.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And it is necessary to treat small abscesses with small incisions; and large abscesses with large incisions, and many cuts according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses or it is necessary to cover the wound, and to cover; when it has become as soft as cloth, and is softened, then it should be done as one does with bedsores: and if there are such abscesses that are cut in three angles, and if there are such abscesses that are covered like the fleece of wool, as abscesses of arrows; and if there are such abscesses where a round cut is made, and other shapes and coverings.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	For those who do not have a head, if the abscess is superficial, it is necessary to lance it completely; and if the abscess is large, and has great swelling, and you lance it, if you do not draw out all the pus in that hour, but only a part; then stop the abscess on the other side, then take away nothing else; do this repeatedly, until all the pus is drawn out; especially if the wound is of weak strength, or a woman carrying, or small children, or old decrepit people.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the experienced never test once with the outflow of the pus, that by chance the wound may die, and you do not lose it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, dry the wound, and check if the abscess wound is small; and if a tailor complains, soothe him with tents of linen or woolen cotton; and if there are large abscesses, and much pus, it is necessary that you put in each one a tent so that they come against each other; and if you have cut into the abscess a part of the skin, and you have pulled it around, it is necessary that you fill it with old cotton or shreds of linen without moisture, and bind it close to the wound; then open, and treat the dressing as long as they are healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if blood clots occur in your work, apply sharp cold and wet compresses, and gently wipe the clot, and put it on the affected area repeatedly for many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the blood clots persist, apply proper treatment and care, and the powders I have mentioned in this book, and if it is too tense or if the wounds are very painful, it is recommended that you put on tents and wipe with dampened cloths in wine and oil; and if it is in a state of inflammation, and the wounds are charred, it is recommended that you put on dampened cloths in cold and oil, or in cold and oil mixed with vinegar, as we have said; then drain the abscess and dress and treat, as it should be, until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And this is what must be understood universally in the treatment of abscesses: now I have told you how to proceed before treating abscesses, and here is the chapter.
des soros	of sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	When small abscesses come from the head, and there are ways of us that are in threads, as is the case of a surgeon's needle, and many more like it.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are also large and such ones that have moisture like chickens; and there are some that are hard and stony to cut, and there is no doubt if the artery is not against it.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of the belly is such that you try every tool called "entromissoire", from which the shape comes after, something it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, it makes it through the long.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is drained, scrape off the hair that contains that moisture, for it returns when one leaves nothing; then plunge cotton in Egyptian oil, if present; if not, in vinegar and salt, and apply it to the wound, and leave it there the next day; and this will prevent what remains overnight.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then, as before, the second day, and the third, with the cotton, until you know that it will not remain overnight; then treat the wound with ointment, as appropriate, until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess does not open easily, then cut it according to this form, long; and pour in your ointments, and scrape off all the skin, and put all your care into drawing out the pus from where it is. And if the artery makes it against you, do as I have told you afterward.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also do the same if the abscess is pierced, and cut and cure as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And if the cut is above the abscess, it is lighter, for they are not deep.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if to any of these abscesses or boils there is no moisture, and of these was the abscess that I copied or from an old woman; and found the abscess as hard as a rough, rough, and white stone, and could not be broken; and if one had tried to cut it, it would have made just as bad a wound as from a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses coming or from the boils, those that come from the head of children and from the roots of the ears, the opening should always be at the most dependent part, to let the pus out; and treat them as it is fitting.
des scrophules	of scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	often have abscess in the neck, and they are dislodged, and they are inflamed, and sometimes come from other parts of the body, and they are very painful, and they are intertwined with each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each scrofula is properly in its own side, as with the neck and the abscess of the jaw, as we have said; and the similarities of these scrofulas are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and there are also harmful ones that do not want to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	In that one which you see of good disposition in the chest, and it is similar to the color of the heart, and it does not move from any part and is not attached to the neck or the artery or the vessel, and it is not deeply buried; then it is necessary that you cut it from above, and scrape all parts, and place the two lips of the wound as one, if you have skill, as we have said in abscesses of the jaw; and treat it little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, and do not make a spouting wound, which the hands may escape, and do not look too early, before you cover what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not stop bleeding, put in the wound vinegar broth, or some powders that stop blood, and close the wound; and leave it until the abscess is soothed, and the wound is softened, and then begin to apply a poultice.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the wound is clean, return to your work, until you complete it; then ask your guide whether there remain any small scabs, and cut and remove them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is much blood in the root of the scab, then it does not matter that you cut that scab at its root, but tie it with a double-strength thread, and let it drip through it without harm; then fill the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian oil, then heal.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you remove the entire pus, it is necessary that you gather the two lips of the wound and hold them together, then since there is no remaining excess due to the size of the pus.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	it is necessary that you cover the root of it and pull out forcefully, and hold it as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those pus-filled abscesses that contain excess, pierce where it is most likely to die; and pierce in this way, hanging down, then apply compresses and similar things, so that it does not corrupt what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well dressed, if the ointment heals, apply char and keep it until it is healed.
de squinance	of dislocation
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients spoke and said of the throat-cutter; but I never saw one in our land, and this is their written word.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	For those who have dislocation, the cut of the neck which is called "epiglottis" must be avoided; and this is because all the veins and the pore of the evil are in those who have abscess full in the mouth, or in the neck or in the throat.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the pore of the mouth, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the danger of strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	Therefore, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, it is necessary that we cut it out in three circles or four, with a small incision across between the two circles or by the quantity of the incision through the surface of the cartilage; and these are suitable for the section of the epiglottis so that there is no harm, and the vessels are long and do not bleed.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the master is not skilled, it is necessary that he stretches the skin of the neck all around, then cuts the cartilage until it comes to the chain; and avoid the veins of blood, if you see anything, and then cover the surface, as we have said; and this is demonstrated by the section of the stream of the chain that springs forth from the limb that is broken, and by the lack of voice; and leave the wound open for a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed for which one doubts strangulation, gather both lips of the wound together, and tie it all around without the cartilage; then administer medicines that produce heat until they are healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasis says that one should not do this as long as the throat is completely stiff, and the limbs are judged to be dead, and the defect causes the arm to fall.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Therefore, one should pierce the epiglottis because the limbs cannot support it, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is kept from death; and because they ordered the ancient ones to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease had passed, and it had passed in three days or four. And therefore, they commanded to sew the wound and cure it, as long as it was healed; and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw that a young lady took a knife and stuck it in her throat, and cut part of the windpipe; and I was called to cure her, and found her as if she were dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the arrow that had come out of it, and although she had not coughed blood nor bled through the throat, the blood came out through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hastened and closed the wound, and cured it so that it was healed; and she did not suffer harm except that she had a weak voice, and she returned to her usual state; for I believe that in the tissue of the epiglottis there is no fear.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	This abscess is called "hernia of the throat", and it is a large abscess in the color of a goose, and is very common in women; and it occurs in two ways: natural and accidental; or naturally without cause.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accidental way is in two ways, one of which is similar to a large goose, and the other way is similar to an abscess that comes from us through an artery; and there is fear, and it should not be opened except by a skilled surgeon, and he should examine and search throughout the entire abdomen: if you find it as I have described, and cannot be cut at all, then cover it with a bandage, just like we do with the others, and remove it completely if there is any; and look for it quickly, and treat it as it should be, until it is healed perfectly.
des nous	For the fire cauterization
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	There are many ways we do, of which I will say all the similarities; and now it is necessary for me to tell the whole difference between us and the issue.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that the issue is chills and fever lasting, until the boils have passed, and is accompanied by the purging; then the fever and chill rest.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With ours there is no chill or fever or pain, and it contains the pus, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins like a small grain, and becomes large; and they are according to two similarities, whether dry or moist, and much of color is as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to treat a new patient, to first test and inquire about the "entromissoire" instrument, according to the form of the chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the manner of inquiring about abscesses is that you press or moisten the least dry part of the abscess that you pierce, and return your fingers slowly and slowly, until you feel that the instrument has pierced the core, then according to the size of the abscess; then extract the "entromissoire", and be careful that it does not slip.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	When moisture runs through a cut, which color it has, make it as I said for the other abscesses; and if afterwards the wound does not come moisture, scrape off the fat, then make a cross on it, and take pincers, and scrape lightly from every part and wipe the coat or where you take it that you take it clean with the knife; and if you cannot take it clean, then tear it in pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	And if nothing remains, it often returns to us; and if it stays for a while without bothering you, then fill the wound with some corrosive powders, and hold the wound, and put on top of things that calm abscesses, and treat other treatments until it is healed; and if the wound is large, then cut out both lips of the wound, and treat what is injured.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	If you see that it is against you or another, if it hurts and fills the wound with broken glass, and leave it for two or three days until the wound heals, and rest the bleeding of the blood; then return to the copper that was left.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	See the shapes of the instruments for puncturing, and there are three ways: large and medium and small; and there are three quarters that are called "albaret", and one that is called "breb", and there are also three ways: large, medium, and small, to extract the abscesses of fistula; and they are like the arrows that one buys for the pots, and are made of gold, or iron, or silver, and are worth as much as those that are yellow, and are more expensive because of their black point to extract the fistula pus; and they are three ways: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the size of the holes.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The forms of nails are of many similarities, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and there are nails that have two prongs in three ways; and there are nails that have three prongs, and they are also of three ways; and there are nails that have two prongs, and a single prong nail, and they are of three ways; and all these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The main purpose of these tools is to cut, and there are some that only cut in one direction, from which we scrape the skin, because we do not want to cut the vein or nerve; and among these scrapers are the almels placed in maniches, so that the pain does not persist at the opening of abscesses; and they are of three kinds: large, small, and medium, as you see; and they are used only in one place, such as legs, arms, breasts, and angles, and similar places; and never made any other tool small, resembling scorers of pustules, according to this form, with which we drain blood.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it is put on no healthy skin that can cover veins, and arteries, and once again it forms according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	No one should inflate the breasts of men when they begin to rot, as if they were the breasts of women; and they remain deformed and swollen, and whoever wants to heal them, it must be according to this form of this line .b. up to .g.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	then scrape the fat, and fill the wound with medicine made of char, then stitch together the two lips of the wound with stitches, and heal it until it is healed; and if the breast sinks down, and is softened for its greatness as it is in women, and make it into two pieces above, by similar cuts; so that one holds to the other at the end of one and the other, so that the largest line contains the smallest according to this form, of this line .b. up to .g.; then scrape the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitching and powders, and what is necessary in the cure, until it is healed; and if it is not healed, or the incision is not made completely, because the pain does not want to rest, or due to the flow of blood, then you must fill the wound with moistened cotton in a corrosive ointment; and leave it until it melts the remaining fat, then heal it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses of the knees
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come from the knees are ways of hard scrofula where there are lumps, and they contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Therefore, those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from the line b to the line g:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus in the abscess is drained, apply old cotton to the wound and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton and treat with ointment suitable for this as long as it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscesses are similar to scrofula, then do as we have said about puncturing scrofula, and if the wound remains open, then cauterize it as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the tearing of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is torn, and the flesh above it is sound, then often abscesses occur, and also there is blood flowing from the vein and abscess; and if one knows this to be due to the artery, then the abscesses are long and even; and if you feel it, it is with tension; and if it is due to the vein, then they are round and less numerous; and it is foolish to cover this abscess, and especially when it is outside the bones and angles and collarbone and in many other places, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, it is necessary to avoid the use of iron, and the one who is at the head should also avoid it, and in the one who is swollen from an artery fleeing through the long skin; then open the belly as much as possible, and tear the artery from the cloth until it is exposed; then insert a needle on the other side, and pierce it with another needle on the other side, and tie the artery with double silk according to what I have indicated in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples; then do not remove the skin between the two belts of an intromission until the one that is there is gone, and remove the abscess; then treat the cure that you have mentioned as long as the wound heals; and if the abscess is for the belly of the vein, if it is necessary to stain your hand with what comes from the abscess on all the skin, then remove the needle from the skin that you hold in your hand, and pierce it, and there should be double silk so that you can pull it from the other side; then tie the abscess as I have indicated to you or with the thread of one of the two parts of the needle; and if you doubt that the thread does not come out, then put another needle all along the thread of the first needle, and tie the threads in four strands; then cover the abscess until the superfluous part is gone, then cover the wound and leave what is left; then put a moist cloth on the wound with wine and oil, then treat the cures of tents and ointments as long as it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses of the neck
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Similarly, abscesses come to the arteries and veins, abscesses also come to the neck when it is cut, or from too much work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And these often occur in the joints and in all parts where there are joints, and this is great pain, and its color resembles the color of blood, and it is in many different positions with pain; and when it is stretched, if the patient feels pain, and it does not look like blood, but rather from outside the body; and it moves from all parts, and does not go forward or backward, nor up or down, and those who are in joints do not need to be covered with iron: perhaps there is contraction; and those who are at the neck or face, making the skin wrinkled.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, tie it with needles at its base; and if it is large, hang it from the tip, scrape it, then remove the bone and stitch the wound at the seam, and care for it until it heals.
des grosses boces pendans	large, hanging tumors
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	There are no cases in the belly and nowhere else, and it is a disease called "fungus" by its resemblance to mushrooms, and it has subtle roots and large heads; and there are both small and very large ones; and I saw a man who had two or three bellies that were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had thin roots, and were always moist.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I copied and found in one XVIII ounces heavy, and in the other VI З., and in the work of the incision is that you look if the hairs are moist, and the color of the artifact is white and moist and of subtle root; if the copper has a wide span, and they are in your presence the fire cautery.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For in cutting often brings too great corrosion of blood, and if you see the hair escaping and fearful of the incision of the iron, take a strong thread well made, and tie the artifact as we have said, and leave it for two days; then restrain, and do not stop stretching the thread through the artifact until it covers the artifact, and cut through it with labor; and if the roots are large, use the copper itself on the belly, but you must carefully cover the half, then cauterize that it does not return; then cure the wound, and guard that you do not cover the thread which is of pale color and poor sense and of little regard.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For these are abscesses that have become infected, and I will come to the treatment of chancres here afterwards.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the wound is suppurating
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the appearance of the suppuration comes from the cauterization of a wound or a cut in the face, and it is on the belly and among some of the pus, as it has in other wounds, or blood that cuts veins or arteries according to what is before, or pus; and if it is from the rupture of the face and from the issue of the feces, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the flesh, and it is a light thing without pain, and open from various issues.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is for the issue of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses it to its sides, it returns, and perhaps if it is torn, and greatly enlarges at the entrance of the bath and for much work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is for moisture, it is a simple matter, and it opens well when one presses it with the hand, without too much constraint; and if it is for an abscess, it is large and hard, and it is attached to a quantity; and if it is for windiness, it is soft to the touch, and the appearance of the work indicates whether it is for the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If it is necessary to leave the care.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, as I have told you or in the chapter on arrows.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if it appears to be for the intestine or the boil, then command the patient to dye his linen, and let it extend straight all around, then sign around the belly; then place the injured part between your hands, then wrap the half of the abscess above the large intestine; then tie it with a strong silk cord tightly, and let the other end be loose; then open the half of the abscess extended over the cord, and insert your finger, and remove the intestine; if you find the cord, cut it, and remove the intestine from the lower part of the belly; and if you find the boil, take it at the base, and scrape away the excess; and if the artery or vein causes you to go against it, then go around it carefully, then return to your work and take two needles, and insert two threads, and cut the two needles where you have pierced; then stretch the abscess in four parts over the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave the part as long as it can bear, and let the dead flesh die by itself; or you can remove it when it has become thin and ready to fall off, then treat the wound as we have said; and extract the pus or moisture that you have found, then treat the part as it needs, and suture the abscess.
dou chancre	For the fire cauterization, instruct
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	For the fire cauterization, instruct
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the procedures, when it is in a place where it can be removed, as we have said, is that you purge once the hairs of black bile; then make it clean if it has manifest repletion, then wipe the hair and skin of good flesh to perform the procedure; then pour your instruments or cauterization, and the hair from all parts, and the skin from all parts without leaving anything; and let the blood flow freely, and wipe well the place with your hand or something, and if the bleeding does not stop, do not make the incision of the artery or vein, if you cauterize until the wound is dry; then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have already spoken in the previous division about the resemblances of dropsy, and how the assembly of the swelling is made, and the signs of each resemblance, and the treatment by medicines, and that which is treated by fire: if it is only swollen; and one should not touch fire in these two resemblances: that is to say, tympanites and hyposarche, for it is a deadly matter; therefore when you treat this resemblance of dropsy which is called "swelling" by medicines, and the treatment does not work, if you look at whether the pain is weak, or if he has another disease besides dropsy, as vomiting and similar things; then do not touch fire, for there is doubt; and if you see the pain of great virtue, and he has no other disease except dropsy alone, and he is not too young or too old, then thus: gently lift the pain upwards with your hands, and the ministers press the belly pushing the swelling to the lowest part of the worst, then take the spatula in this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let the incision be of two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	And let the incision be pointed, and ensure that no part is too deep so that it can reach the intestines when cutting, and it cannot bleed; then check if there is dropsy near the intestines: if it is necessary to make a second incision three fingers' breadth from the navel on the left side; and if it is for the disease of the liver, then the incision should be on the right side of the navel three fingers' breadth; and if it is for the miuce, then it should be on the left side, and it should not be necessary that the hairs grow over the incision so that the superfluous do not run to the weak liver; then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and push, and remove your hand from all the space between the skin and the flesh as if scraping at a quantity of an inch or around; then pierce the flesh until the space reaches the desired length, and that is the length of the blade, then remove this instrument with this shape:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it is similar to a thin silver chain, and is made of light rain or iron, and has a small opening at one end; and on the other side, three openings; and two on the other side, and one on the other; and the head of the shoulder is slit as with a pen, and that is the form of the incision that the scribes make the pen:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	At the top of the instrument is the awl, so that when the instrument comes to the skin, then descend now above the instrument; voiding the half or the third part, because if you void more than it is necessary in that hour, by chance if the patient dies from the resolution of his spirit from the arm, or he faints, or he approaches death; but in voiding according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the wound mean, and its thorns; then withdraw the instrument and retain the skin, and it is retained now for the one who stops the opening that is above the syringe, of which I have spoken, that you perforate in this manner; then start the instrument again the next day, if you see the patient suffering as, and take from the skin a small quantity; do this every day, and guard against following too long until it is only a little blood.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt the pain, and you let it be very severe, then the cure of the sepulture or sand bath, and much sweat or bath and in the sun, and if it becomes infected from drinking; and the cure of desiccative medicines until it is healed, and cauterize above the stomach and above the liver and above the spleen after the extraction of the splinter, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the insertion of the staff
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	No child ever is born without a pustule in the staff, or the pustule is small, or it is not in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is necessary to prick at all times with a very fine needle according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then place or puncture the very fine thread of silk, and tie it and keep it in this way for three days or four, and when it wants to urinate, if it can be opened, urinate, and then put it back; and perhaps it does not suit, because the urine that comes out does not leave it closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	If the one who is punctured is small, it is treated with a very fine thread of silk, as we have said, and it will expand.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have the puncture in their limb are blind, because no one is born with the puncture at the tip of the penis, so that they cannot urinate before their penis reaches the top; and they cannot ejaculate because the matter cannot come to the marriage, and it is a very bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the method of the work is such that the hairs lie so often on their backs, the head of the knife and the handle are like the size of a pen, so that the punctured wound is in the middle, as it should be; and guard against the evacuation of blood which often comes, and if it does, use the same cloth to stop the bleeding.
des pustules de la verge	of the pustules of the knife
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Often come pus blisters in the knife, and it is an appearance of a bad wound; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; if you prick them at the tip of the knife, and wrap and clean all, then put on a moist cotton bandage in Egyptian method; then the treatment of the wound continues until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if it is a malignant ulcer, with putrid color and foul odor, then you must cauterize it with fire.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have scraped it, and if the ulcer is deep within the skin and has parts inside and outside, then you must first remove the part that is inside; and when it is cleaned, then treat the part outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you treat them together, do not be sure that the wound is not pierced, and if it becomes darker and more corruption in its wound and where the coion; then remove everything that is black and corrupted, then apply the ointment made of honey and flour which is made of grape skins and walnuts, then treat other treatments until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if bleeding comes from a wound, then treat the lunar cauterization as follows:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cauterization helps in two situations: when bleeding occurs and when the wound is corrupted. If the tailbone is corrupted and retracted, then you should apply a cloth soaked in urine to the affected area and urinate on it; if the skin has not been circumcised, or if it is a wound or an abscess, then you should scrape it with a sharp instrument until the tissue is loosened and freed from all parts of the tailbone; if this is a difficult task, then you should scrape it with a sharp instrument at the head of the tailbone and the surrounding area, then apply a subtle dressing of linen moss in cold water, so that it does not recur.
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not different from other wounds; therefore, when we perform this work of our will, and properly in children, it is necessary that we do the best work, and the lightest for health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not practice circumcision on their children, because they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	Because I have seen the majority of masters and experts who performed circumcision around the age of one year, and in force, and at all times; if it was the case that one of them covered the glans penis and delayed the other from above.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	And the recovery is slow, and the pain is doubled, and the wound healing which is done by chance often escapes the point of the member; and the healing of the joint may escape and corrupt the work, and many times it happens that they are born thus without need of healing and I have seen it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the healing which is done by force to all the member of the limb I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you press your hand, it cuts equally in all the thickness; but that the thread be well stretched around the skin; and the method of the first work is that you make the child think, if he listens, that you do not tie the thread only around the stick so much, and then throw the force between your hands or outside your feet that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then close your hand on the stick and blow gently, and take it up as high as the end of the stick is; then clean the dirt that is gathered, then tie the limb with a double thread, then tie it away from one limb to another; and hold it between two fingers by the second work at the pouch and the correct index, and cover between the two limbs, then lift the breath quickly and take the head of the stick; then let the blood flow slowly and slowly, for that is the most dangerous; and put powder on top and on top of the powder a piece of glue from a piece of fresh meat cooked with rosewater, confected with rose oil and fresh, and leave it there until the next day, and treat the other cure until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of forces for the mummification is such: the two heads should be tense and sharp, and the heads should be equally large:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of the mummification is when the cut is too deep at the incision; therefore, it is necessary to extend it to your angle, similarly with the copper, and if you cannot hold it at your angle, then hold it with pliers, and then the copper.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they exceed three hours, and what is outside the rod is inflated, let it remain until the abscesses are soothed, and scrape lightly; and if the copper as you can move, and guard from the part of the rod, it will not harm him.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, treat the limb of things that have been wounded by powder wounds, which we have said to treat powders, and if one goes too far with care, it will not harm; therefore, treat them as we have said until they are healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The retention of urine is due to the closure of a stone, or blood congealed, or bowel, or charred, or similar things that we have said in the division; and if the urine is not released, and you see that the retention is due to the stone which is high or close to the bladder, it is necessary that the hairs be pulled up over his knees; and his feet should be placed on his back, and his belly stretched from the part above the back, and the hairs restrained as much as possible; and thus the opening of the bladder is pressed against the stone above, for which reason the urine is released, and if it does not come, as we have said, and the hairs feel great pain, then you must administer extraction with all the instrument called «siringue», of which this is the form: and it should be made of thin silver hair, like the pen of an eagle; and it should be slender at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And the manner of the issue of the urine is such that you take a double thread, and tie the head of the linen or cotton to the chief of the tube, and blow the head of the thread into the tube; and fold the excess of the linen and blow it at the head of the tube, then oil the tube with oil or butter and egg yolk, and make the patient sit on a stool, and the urine and the cloth moistened with oily oil and olive oil and vinegar; then press the tube firmly to the end of the tube, until it reaches the root of the tube, then double the tube upwards over the edge; then blow the tube before towards the cloth, and feel the patient coming towards the empty thing, and this is not made according to this order except by reason that the conductor or she goes twisted; then stop the thread at all the linen little by little, and the urine follows the linen, then extract it, and correct the urine; and start again the tube until the bladder is empty and aligned with the patient.
des maladies de la vessie	of bladder diseases
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When skin or blood comes into the bladder, and there is inflammation and assembly, and you see distillation of acids and medicines, then use all the instrument called «clepsedre», and it is the form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed, and has three holes: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and the needles are passed through the part where the medicine cuts so that it does not touch the urethra too much, so that you can draw out the moisture, and put in whatever is necessary; and when you see your medicines entering the bladder, put the head of the syringe into the moisture, and pull the piston which is outside; then draw the moisture into the syringe, and pump it strongly back inside; then the moisture will enter inside, and come to the bladder now, so that the pain will feel it; and this is the form of the subtle catheter with which you catheterize the bladder: if it is in:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it is of silver or iron, and is the highest part; and removed from the shoulder where the tendons are; then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture that you see clisterizer the bladder, then lay it between the two breasts formed by a good double thread of wool, and heat the pooc of that moisture over the fire; then pour the head of the clistere into the rod, then strain your hand on the bladder all around the moisture, until the hairs feel that that moisture has come to the bladder; and if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle, and perforate it roundly; then pull the thread strongly in these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles the dal, and put inside what you see oil and moisture and vinegar, and tie it with the tool; and do as you have done with the bladder, press with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere	of stones
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	In the division of the chapters, we have spoken about the ways of stones and their extraction together with medicines; and I have said the difference between the stones that are in the rain and all the signs, and in which stone one should open a hole; and in the bladder, and in the staff; and I will tell you plainly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stones that are in the bladder often occur more frequently in children, and this is a sign that the sharp pain of the bladder resembles a sharp pain in its subtlety; and it opens harene, and causes great pain to the staff, and it happens many times, and then hardens; and at too many of these pains the foundations; and it is light for the healing of children up to the age of four, and it is very painful in old people, and is a constant complaint for those between young and old; and it is a lighter cure for those who have large stones, than for those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to treatment, it is first necessary to cleanse the wound with ointment, to draw out all the matter that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it never clogs up when trying to remove the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the wound by the feet, and stand up and move it away from the body, so that the stone descends to the edge of the bladder, and never goes up through the thigh; then sit it between your hands and prepare it, and your hands should be away from your thighs, so that the bladder is entirely descending downwards; then remove and touch it inside; if you feel the stone in the space, then hurry to cut across the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if she does not cry out at all, then gently press your right index finger onto the palm of her hand, if the pain is sharp, or in the middle, if the pain is dull; and apply it to the base, and strike with a stone, and when you feel it at your finger, then moisten the area where you see it cutting into the skin; then press upwards, and the blood will flow out where you see it cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the minister to press the anus with his hand, and command him to extend his right hand over the testicles, and his left hand to remove the skin that is outside the testicles in the part where the incision is made; then cut the sponge, of which this is the shape:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And making between what is between the thighs and the foundation, not in the middle but on the right side of the naval; and it should be straight up the spine, and its tail should be at the foundation or the base, and its belly should be wide by deficiency, and inside it should be narrow, according to the quantity of the spine, not too large; perhaps the pressure that is at the foundation, that it should jump out without effort; and if there are pieces or angles, and margins: if it is gray to issue, and if there are pieces that are smooth, like a glass, and rounded, whose exit is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	When there are angles and margins in that place, make the incision larger; and if it does not jump, it is necessary to strain it with nails that are as thin as a lime at the top, for the stone to not escape; or you drive out of the instrument subtly curved at the top; and if you do not engage it thus, expand the little pouch, and if there is no decortication, then strain it with vitriol; and if there are more than one stone, first take the largest at the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then remove the small ones, and the smaller ones afterward if there are many.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, it should be made larger, and a larger wound made.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For two things happen to the wound: either it dies, or the urine comes out through the place where the bones cannot be healed; but nevertheless you must try to draw it out, or tear it with pincers, until you pull it out in pieces; and when you have completed your work, apply incense, aloe, and dragon's blood to the wound, and bind it, and place a moist cloth soaked in oil and wine, or oil and vinegar and cold rosewater, to soothe the abscess; then replace the wound on its bone, and do not remove the bandage until the next day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you reset it, apply a lot of oil and vinegar to the joint, then treat with an ointment of honey and basilicon until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if an abscess comes into the wound and corrosions, and clots of blood in the bladder, and is retained by the urine, which is known to be held without leakage with the urine: then put your hand in the wound, and extract that clot, for if it remains, it will rot the bladder, and cause it to perish; then lift the wound with vinegar and salt and herbs, and help it in all ways that you can, until it is healed; and it is necessary that all the remedies that you cure it with, that you tie both thighs together, and gather the medicines above the joint.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the arrow is small, and it is conducted by a rod, and tied up, and the urine cannot issue; then the cure for this that I have said before, that you cut many times, is to excuse the cutting for this cure.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already experienced this.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take an iron rod according to this form and be at three angles tied up in one thread:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take a thread and tie the arrow around the rod outside of the bladder, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then gently push the iron rod into the rod until it reaches the arrow; and slowly turn the iron rod in your hand on the arrow, until you can pierce the arrow from the other side; then soon the urine will come out, then press your hand above where the part of the arrow that is inside the rod is.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is already broken, and it has jumped with the urine, and it is stuck to the hairs; and if you cannot do this for any reason, then pull the thread from below the stone and the other above, then make the rod in the middle of the stone between the two threads, then extract it, and remove the thread, and clean the clotted blood that is in the wound; and cure until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	of the stone from women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It is rare that stone occurs in women, and if it does occur once, the cure is difficult, and it is forbidden for three reasons: the first is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman who is well-dressed who will undress herself, specifically when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third way is that perhaps one cannot find a woman well versed in this art of hands; and the fourth way is that if the woman's stone is larger than the man's stone, it is necessary to make a deeper cut, and there is great fear involved. And if necessary, you should send for a skilled midwife, and if you cannot find one, do not try to perform the operation yourself; instead, call a wise woman who knows part of the art, and command her to do what you command regarding the examination of the stone; and look very carefully if the woman is a virgin: then it is necessary to place her on her back and ask for the stone; and if she finds it, she should push it out of her body, and recommend that she push it out or bear down with her right hand on her anus, forming a fist.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she finds it, it is necessary to move it from great to great from the entrance of the anus until it reaches the root of the thigh; then cut across the bone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the body, where it is muscle-filled, and feel the arrow in that part; and do not move her above the bone or below, and let the tailor make a small hole in the first place; then push the arrow through the hole in the belly until the arrow can come out, and know that there are many kinds of arrows: namely, small and large and sharp and blunt, long and round and rough and smooth, and those with rain.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	if you know the similarities to recognize the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if you do not know, put leeches on the wound, and keep them there for an hour until the wound is dry; then return to your work, until the stone is fully removed, and have tools that I have told you about in the extraction of the stone as helpers in your work; and if you do not know, and it is the artery that has been cut, put powder on the wound and bandages and bandages, and do not restart, and leave the stone and do not pull it out, for fear that the patient might die; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is calmed, and the wound healed, return to your work until the stone is formed.
de hernie carnouse	for a hernia carnouse
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Watery ramice is nothing other than an assembly of moisture or white faca, which is detached from the intestines, which contain the urine; and it is called «faca», and never properly in the thread of the urine, if one wishes that it is another urine; and this is the skin of the intestine between the white faca that we have said; and it does not have it unless there.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this branch is from weakness that comes to compressions, and it is spread out that matter.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And sometimes it comes from blows to the compressions, and this moisture has many colors: or it is declining yellow to jaundice, or it is without red, or black, or aquous white, and there are more; and these are the signs to know this assembly, because if it is white as we have said, it is the abscesses are, I poc long as the figure of an egg, and does not open the compressions, for it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if it has moisture in its own skin, it is the abscesses are with part of the egg, and because one thinks that it is another egg; and if the moisture is between the skin of the compressions and the white asfac, then it feels good; therefore when you want to know the color of the moisture, try all the intermediary questions, from which its form was before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes after the introducer, judge what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we treat it with iron, it is necessary to clean the hairs according to as much power and the repletion of its body; then place it on its back, on something a little high, and cover it with much cloth; then lie on its left side, and command the minister to lie on its right, and extend the iron to one of the two ribs of the chest; then take the spatula and scrape the skin of the chest from the long end to above the wrist, and its edge straight in cutting the skin of the chest towards the white face, and scrape the skin subtly according to as much power; then pierce the white plain with a sharp and wide opening, and extract all the sharp, and then put your forceps, and fasten the white above; and do not touch the ribs of the chest, but only the white; scrape all or in pieces carefully the side of it subtly, if you do not scrape it well, it will return to the sharp; and if the vein springs up in your work, then reset it in its place when you have completed the work of the white. Then gather the two flaps of the chest at one seam, then treat it as the other wounds, until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you have removed the broken bone that has been corrupted by another disease, it is necessary to bind the vessels that are suspended, in doubt of the flow of blood; then cover the wound with all the suspended, and extract the bone, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the bone is assembled in two parts together, it is because there are two branches; then cover the other part as you have done the first evenly, then suck out the blood, and put in the wound a poultice of rose oil; and put on top another poultice of wine and oil, and place over the two bandages, and tie it to the limb that is according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two cloths and place them according to this pattern around the neck of the trousers, and one of them above the foundation at the back, and the other at the part of the elbow; and the other two at the two angles, and everything assembled is restricted in the loop of the trousers; and once this branch of the cautery is medicated in the shape of an iron tail, and it is that you take a sharp cauterizing instrument, and cut into the skin of the wounds, and heat it as we have said, so that the white pus that contains the poison is discovered; then take the cautery according to this form, and prick the pus with small incisions, and scrape the skin with this sharp cautery:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And in all ways that you can, until you remove everything; and beware that the knife does not touch the bone; and cleanse this work so that it is safer; and guard against bleeding, and avoid things that are harmful; and if anything goes wrong, such as an abscess or bleeding or other harmful thing, treat it according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	If the pain is severe and does not want to undergo this work due to its horror, then apply incision, as I have said, and when you are certain that the abscess is ready to be lanced, as we have indicated, place the pain on a raised seat; then pierce the abscess at the part farthest from all the soft tissue, and make the incision along the length of the body; and let the wounds be wide so that all the sharp edges are removed; then put cotton on the wound, and tie it, and leave it to drain the remaining sharp edge, then treat the wound until the wound is healed; and if the white cloth does not allow the sharp edge to issue from the mouth of the wound, it is necessary that you insert a pen or the instrument used to treat the sharp edge of hydropikes, as its form has been indicated before; and enlarge the wound slightly, and let the sharp edge return, and gather after six months or within a few days, and when it is gathered as before, and thus the pain will pass its days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of abscesses in the groin
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	There are many different positions that cause fear in more people, because it seems to me that moving is better than leaving it; and I will tell you the work and similar things about the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say therefore that many abscesses come from the groin and immediately from the thighs; and this is often the case.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	It is to be known whether it comes from excessive aggravation and ague, which spreads in the groin, or from percussion; and the color of the abscess is according to the color of the blood; and there is no pain, and it is a grievous abscess; and perhaps it is some gray, poor, and pus-filled abscesses, and of yellowish color, and sometimes comes from a vein, or from an inflammation of the vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is by the lack of artery, then it is known by the position of the abscess being high, when you press it towards your fingers; and it should only be touched once.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	Those who are made of vein puncture are known by their position at the expression of gentle touching of the fingers, and can often make the cut above this resemblance, and above others; and you should check the care of the wounds, then lift the skin high, and pull out the thread from below the white surface, and deliver the suspended part of all parts of the skin.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the skin is already swollen with these needles, then it should be cut and cleaned; and if it is in the white surface, or inside the vessels, then it should be delivered completely, and cleaned roundly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the arrow's head is in the back, it is necessary that you remove it all, and extract the tip, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your surgeries are completed, apply the wound with a linen cloth soaked in rose oil and wine, then use other treatments until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the groin
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is an abscess surrounded by a swelling similar to a hernia, with the softening of the groin, and the pain increases when it moves; and the treatment of this disease is just as difficult and dangerous as the previous one, and we will tell you the operation for it, according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	It is necessary to seat the painful part on an elevated seat, then lift the suspensory ligament of the tendons down to your fingers, and all the veins that are close to the thigh, and the hair of the masters, and extend them evenly; then cut with a sharp knife across the middle of the veins, as far as they are revealed, and then scrape from each part, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in temples; then take an awl or double-pronged needle, and tie it to the first limb where the blood came out, and tie it on the other side; then align them straight in the middle of the body, according to the length of the body, and draw out the corrupted blood; then cure the wound as the others or one would bandage, so that none of the veins are torn; for by this no harm comes, and if all the veins come out, it is necessary to pull the veins from all the limbs; so that the bone does not lose its connection due to the incision of the veins, and dry and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	of the breaking of the tooth
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The causes of this fracture are due to the section that comes out from the tooth or the extension over the belly in the part of the angles, because the intestines descend from that fracture to one of the sides; and this fracture is either from the tooth or from the extension of it, and these two methods of many causes are: from the impact, or the jump, or the shout, or the lightness of a heavy blow, and similar things; and the signs when it is the extension of the tooth, it is that it has little and little, in long tension, and does not come suddenly; and it is the abscesses equal to the front, because the tooth is close to the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs of the cutting of the intestines are when it causes sudden pain at the beginning, and there are various appearances of abscesses outside the skin, and this is for the end of the intestines and the heart due to the cutting of the intestines.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the intestines are torn with the cuts, and they are retained inside, and cause great pain to suffer from the wound, especially when they are pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these cases of iron, because it is feared that it should be avoided.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And the way of the work is that you command or fear that the intestines be rolled up in your hand inside the wound, if it can be pulled back; then hold them between your hands and loosen the ribs; then bring the forehead above, and cover all the skin of the belly with a cloth according to what you have to open the wound; so that the white intestines do not come out through all parts; then cut off the intestines that are outside the skin of the belly, as far as the white intestines that are outside the skin of the belly and between the second intestines, and behind the belly, and between the second intestines; and move your right hand inside the belly of the belly, and hold the white intestines in your left hand above, and loosen the belly towards the tail; and command the assistant to stretch the belly upwards, and remove what is behind the skin; and if you find anything, whether it is an intestine or a white intestine that is not covered, and if you find anything, put it in the stomach outside; then take a needle or a thick thread made of twelve threads, and put it in the back part of the intestines, which is after the skin of the belly; then cover the threads with the intestines, and tie them into two parts, so that no vessel that the threads pierce can enter into wounds, that an abscess does not form; and put on the first thread according to the first thread, and after these two threads leave the part of the intestines that is outside the belly of the belly the great of a thumb; and then the other according to the roundness that the belly carries; then cover the part that is outside the skin of the belly, as we have said before; then moisten linen with oil, and put it on the wounds, and then moisten the thread that we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And never cauterize the white pustule that we have mentioned after incision, due to fear of blood clotting.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this often happens, and let the wound remain until it heals; and if it takes too long to settle, then add hot vinegar on top of what we have mentioned, until it heals; then treat the wound with other treatments, until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia carbuncle
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch, I have never seen anyone dare to perform the cure by iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients said that it is made as the branch that is together with the wound, in a way that you tie the veins, after the incision slightly above the opening; then cover it, and treat the abscess with what works, until the veins heal; and the cure as we have mentioned, until it is perfectly healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	No fractures ever come from anger, as we have said, and it opens the wounds; and no one should expose any of the intestines to the air, and if they do, it is only for a short time; and every hour, if it remains too long in this state, the wound will swell; and this happens from the extension of the intestine which is in the fracture, as we have said, because it is stretched, then it is softened and inflated the wound and opened; and the cure is by cauterization, as we have previously said; and no cure is ever done in this way: and it is that the wounds are closed over their back between your hands, then cover the wound of the fracture with a wide cloth according to the quantity of three fingers; and then pull out the intestine which is outside the skin that encases it, then take the two ends of the intestine apparent of the fracture over the top of the belly, and press against the front of the belly, then cut the two ends of the intestine apparent of the fracture over the top of the belly, and cut both; then pull out the top of the wound, and do not cover the fracture or stretch the skin or anything else, as I have told you in the cure of the ruptured intestines; then cure by the treatment of wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the threads, unwind and heal the wound, until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The suture is tight, and has no appearance of breaking, and the cauterization is quiet in this place, and closer to healing.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the leather of the shoes
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the leather of the shoes is softened in some people, because the chariots that are inside are softened, and it can be seen; and when one wants to cure it, it is necessary to let the sore lie on its back, and cut the softened leather over the natural leather; then bring together the two edges at a seam, and if you see, first remove the excess softened leather at three or four stitches; then sew between the seams, and cure it like other wounds, until it is healed, and cut the thread.
dou chastrement	severely
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	It is customary to speak of chastisement in our law, and for this reason I wish not to speak of it in this book; and there are only two ways: one is that the patient respond to chastisement when asked, and be cured by chastisement; and the other, because we often have to chastise some animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and rabbits and others.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say therefore that chastisement is done in two ways: either by pulling or by cutting.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In the one that we do by pulling, make the animal sit in a high heat, until the tendons are softened and during; then take them in your hand, until they are returned and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	For the chastisement of the tail: it is necessary that you tie the animal, and press the skin of the scrotum with your right hand, then hang the suspensor, and cover each testicle with a cloth, when you have well burned them; and leave no drop of blood or subtle blood that is on the vessels; and this method of chastisement is more effective than that which is made by attraction, because by attraction something of the skin remains, by which the animal desires to escape. Then cure the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	Hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermaphrodites are according to the two manners of men: one is that between the two testicles open as in the shape of a woman, or it has hair, and sometimes they cut off the urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And another method is used in women, and it should be as high as a finger and twice as thick.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the treatment of the mouth and the anus is that you remove all the soiled rags, and treat them like other wounds; in the second method, for men whose urine sprays through the skin of the anus, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	of the tenting
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	Tenting is a soiled rag placed on the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see; and some women have it as large as a hand, and that is the treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is necessary that you clean the excess of the tenting with your hand or cloths, and remove it lightly; and do not let it stay too long, as blood does not come out, then treat it like other wounds until it is healed; and another rag that grows at the mouth of the anus, and use it, and perhaps it sprays, and it is according to the appearance of a cow, and for this they called the old «cow disease».
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If it is necessary to apply it, as we have said about the remedy, and care for it until it is healed.
de erratique	The following text is a medieval medical treat
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	Erratique refers to the nature of a woman's womb, which is not always perceived, or when the uterus is small; and it is natural by birth, or due to disease that has come, or it is caused by charm, or subtle or sharp spirits, and it is made in the marsh, or in the cost, or outside, or wherever it may be; and it prevents conception, and pregnancy, and possibly the flowers to have; and the knowledge of this is by looking at the belly.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the swelling appears nearby, it is near the shoulder or the arm.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is a subtle swelling, and it is near the two shoulders, then hurry, and do as follows: place your two index fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread; then stretch the two shoulders, forming them until the subtle swelling is removed, and it is over the swelling; then take linen, and soak it in oil, and place it on the limb, and bandage the woman to bed each day, so that she cannot move.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the swelling is hard and rough, then it is necessary to use a poultice similar to a leaf of myrtle.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the wound is from a horse, if it has been exposed to the air and the cloth; and have the remedies stanching blood, such as acacia, blood of dragon, incense, abundant amount of oil; then apply a large piece of clean linen, so that the wound cannot close; and thus let it drain, and apply a tent of dry linen; then treat with other remedies until it is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when in the marsh there is a horse wound, if it needs to be covered, then do so in this manner, unless it is an abscess.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For the abscess that is in the marsh, one should not touch with fire.
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that do not usually bleed, and when the hemorrhoids become old, they become thrombosed; and we have said in the division the similarities of these, and the signs, and I will say here those that require treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and thrombosed veins, when they are pressed in the marsh, do not open unless they are treated with iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those that can be felt at the edge of the marsh, those are the ones that can be cured.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	Therefore, it is necessary to place the woman in a cold house, then pull out the thrombus with pincers, and cut off its root, then powder over medicines that stop bleeding, such as acacia and sulfur and incense, and similar things; then boil her feet for an hour, then place her in very cold water; and if blood comes out, sit her in a decoction of sumac and scrapeings of green pomegranates and galls and similar things, and then take flour of wheat, and mix it with honey and egg, and make an ointment on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	If he is thirsty, it is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If not, give him suction cups to the back and breasts without injury; then take the linen, and moisten it in juice of plantain or juice of comfrey with old wine, and apply to the affected area.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess is ready to burst, treat the wound with hot compresses until it is healed; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a rough boil, if it should cover it as I have said the thistle; and then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	of boils on the marsh
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many types of boils come in the marsh, such as chancre and pustular abscess and herpes and esthiomenes and fistulas and hemorrhoids and chronic abscess, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	Therefore, I must mention in this treatment the chronic abscess that comes in the marsh, which is not among the other types of boils; and if you know how to treat with iron, look to see if the abscess is aggravated at the beginning of its coming, and if it causes chill and fever, and if it becomes red, then you should see.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Therefore do not rush to pierce it, but make him endure the pain for as long as possible until the pain is relieved; and then place the misaligned part on a chair, and have two small chairs where he can lean, and support his back and gather his feet to the sides of the leg; and let his knees be spread out, and put his arms away from his hips, and tie them firmly with a good rope; then bring him the instrument used to open the mouth of the marsh, from which afterwards comes the form; and it is necessary that when you see this instrument being prepared, you check the depth of the marsh, so that what goes into it does not go deeper than it should, and that it does not hurt the misaligned part; and if the instrument is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the marsh with cloths, so that the instrument does not hurt it; and it is necessary for him to put the horn of the instrument on top, and to stain the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when the abscess is open, and one does it by hand, if it needs to be covered at the head, with the spongy lead; and when the wound is empty, it is necessary to put moistened linen tents in rose oil or green dry oil; and place the tent from the wound to the parchment of the marrow, and place on the other side of the parchment and on the clean netted linen moistened with vinegar or malmsey, so that the wound is cooked; then cure after two hours of oil application until it is healed; and never lift the parchment and the wound by a poultice of vinegar and honey, and then vinegar or roots of lily and aristolochia are boiled; then reapply the oil.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is placed in marshy ground, it is necessary to be careful not to cook with iron, but cure it as we have said in the section on division.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	The midwife is first to the birth that she knows the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs when you see the woman approaching, and desiring to smell the air: then hasten the child to issue; then wipe that child according to the natural figure, and it is born with its head, and the second with him; and when you see these signs, if it is necessary to gently press her belly, so that the child comes out quickly; for when it descends on its head, and the second is with him, and it is washed in the marsh of its superfluities by good cleaning; and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it never comes up from its feet, and comes forth through the back or the shoulder, and the hands, or it comes up over its belly, or sometimes, and is turned over its own collar, and by other bad figures; so it is necessary for the dancer that she be wise and skillful in these things, and if she goes wrong and is deceived, I will show you all the figures how one should help.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes out of its head naturally, and the woman gives birth with great pain, and her strength is weak, then let her sit on a chair, or the women hold her; and after her natural oil or fenugreek is cooked, and then give the dancer between her two little fingers the small spatula of which here is the form:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	and pierce the second joint, and cover it with a bandage until the moisture that is inside has gone; and take the belly of the woman so that the infant descends, and if it does not descend, then you must cluster the woman with fenugreek musk with sesame oil; then let her inhale and spit out the condition, and keep her mouth and nose closed for an hour: if this now makes the infant descend.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if both hands are dislocated, then you must gently and gently put them back in place; and if they cannot enter, then let the woman sit on a chair, and lift her feet up; then raise the chair over the ground, and tie the woman, so that she does not fall during the raising; and if the hands cannot enter, and the child is dead, then cover the hands with the cloth that was previously placed on the belly, and extract the child, and put it back in place gently.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	of the child's feet above
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes up on its feet, if it is necessary to put it up high; then gradually turn it over and over, until it is even; then take both feet and extend them gradually.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If it jumps from the crib, if it is able to grab it, and make it sneeze with condition; if it jumps far, if God wills.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not jump as we have said, then gradually turn it over and over, until it is in accordance with the natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it is definitely.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if it does not come out as we have described, take muskroot and wormwood oil, melted gum, and ground in a mortar; and put on the woman's nature inside and outside this pessary, then make her sit in a high chair until above the ribs; and when she is softened, apply a mustard plaster, and remove it, and let her rest for an hour; then make her sit on a stool, then make her vomit and hold her mouth and nose, and lightly press her belly, for the child is born now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	from the end of the child's fingers
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the infant comes in this form, place your hands gently and gently on its back; then lean it over your shoulder, and hang its legs down, and lie it on the bed; then gently fold your hands and gently press them on its stomach, and remove its clothes little by little until it is clean; and if the infant does not cry, take its feet and gently move them upwards, then gently move its stomach upwards, then push your hands down; and gradually bring the infant to the breast; and feed it gently; and command the woman to hold it until the infant is finished.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the issue of the child who comes out wide a hand during
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	It is necessary to engineer to bring back the hand: if one cannot bring it back, then lift the woman, and go; if she cannot go, then make her lie on the bed, and bend her legs in a way; then remedy the muscle that I have told you about; and if she does not give birth, then make her sit on the chair, then study to bring back the hand; and nurse the child according to its natural shape, and make it suckle, and command her to hold it until the child is born.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	from the issue of the child on its neck, and let his hands be spread out, and his face turned towards the back of his mother
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	It is necessary that the midwife wash her hand, then turn it slowly and gently; and when it is even, if she puts on the muscle-like substance of oil and grease, as we have said, then command her to move slowly; and when you have done this, make her sit on a chair, and command her to breathe; and make her spit.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In the same way, for all the others
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it comes to doing this with all the others, if the second one can hold her hand under her face and on her neck, cover her mouth so that she is not held, and the child dies; then close the child inside, as you have put it, and command the woman to breathe only once: then she will be free.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the issue of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	It is known that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four at a time; and this is not an unusual thing, and it often happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	It is an unusual thing, and they do not live long, unless named; I know that they are multiplied, and are separated by the sac that gives birth to them, which is connected to the womb; and sometimes they come out as naturally as one at a time, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they are born forcefully, as the cure as we have said, and if the birth canal is subtle, and do what it does quickly and lightly; and do so that it is done well for their health.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Never are formed in the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, or more than fifteen, and all are formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of the skilled physician, and it is advisable that the midwife examines everything, because by chance similar things happen to them; so do according to what is necessary.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When caring for the woman of the dead child or belly, as I have said in the division, and if it does not come out, and you are forced to perform a manual delivery; then it is necessary that you examine whether the woman is of sound health, and has no accident or fear of death; then it is necessary that the woman be placed on her back, and her knees raised; and the midwife applies two fingers into the vagina if she is lying in bed so that she is not treated by the extraction of the child; then rub the mouth of the uterus with moist oils made from garlic and fenugreek and linseed, then apply the midwife's hands with these oils and these oils; then apply them lightly into the uterus, then if she swallows the instruments that are suitable for her, and if the child is apparelled that it descends over its head; then apply the instruments in her eyes or on her neck or in her mouth or in her palate or behind the beard or at the temples or near the ribs, and if the child descends over its feet, then apply it or poignil and to the sides of the middle; and it is necessary that she grease the instrument with her right hand, and place the forceps between her left hand's fingers, and press it at all her hand lightly, and apply the instrument in any of these ways that we have said, until it comes to the empty thing; and this is the shape of the instrument:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then find the other bone opposite, where the doctor has skill, so that the extraction is equal; then move it equally from one side to the other, to make it come out, and hold the bones in place, as follows:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if a part remains, apply some of his two fingers oil, and push it into that part, and pull out the other part; and if it does not remain, put this bone or higher up, and do so until it all comes out.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be brought back by tightening, then you must wrap it above the wound, until it all comes out; then cover it in the joint of the foot or at the heel, and thus you must do in the other hand, and on both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	For the child, if it is large and stiff at the end, or if it has a sharp bend in the spine, you must insert the spatula between your fingers, and straighten the spine; or you can use the tool called «almidach», from which the form comes with the tools or chapter that follows this one; and thus the same is done for the child with a great natural bend; and then remove the bones with pliers, and if the child jumps up and is held at the forceps, if they are broken, cut them until the blood issues out; and if it cannot issue, then cut it piece by piece as you can; and if it is swollen in the belly or outside the ribs, you must prick it until the blood flows.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the infant is above its feet, then the traction is light, and the pressure at the mouth of the marsh is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if the infant is stiff in the belly or the foot, it is advisable to pull it out with a rolled-up cloth over your hand; and when the belly or the foot is loose, until the moisture that is inside is removed; and if the other member is broken, and the injured one remains, then put your hand in front of the marsh, and pull it to the mouth of the marsh; then put the first or second cloth, and pull it out; and if the mouth of the marsh is retracted due to abscess that has come, it is not advisable to struggle, but it is advisable to administer moist and greasy things; and the ointments are plasters, and they are in high moistening and softening and moistening.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if it is above the shoulder, and you can put it back in place, then follow what we have said about setting a live child; and if you cannot do that, then cut off the first piece, and leave nothing of the second.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done that, then follow what we have said about treating abscesses that come in the marsh; and if blood comes out, it should be bandaged tightly, and other treatments should be followed.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whose womb an infant had died, then consulted the other about it, and refused to let the others die.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, some abscesses appeared in the armpit, and they swelled up so much that they burst, and then began to cause great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I went to the doctor, and I thought for a long time, and I could not close the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put on strong adhesive plaster, and it stuck to some bones, and after some time, it stuck to others.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was very surprised because the belly does not have any bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought that it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I looked at the wound, and I saw many bones, until the woman was in much better condition; and then she had a little blood in her urine; and I do not remember this chapter except that when masters find an unusual thing, they know how to give help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	bring the marsh back to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	then comes the form of pressure, with which one opens the books; and to the second returns to the second questions of the two joints.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	nevertheless, the horns should be more subtle than the restraining device, and should be made of iron or wood; and the mouth of the fist should be two inches wide, and the margin of the trees one palm and a half; and between the two joints should be two supports of this same fist, which should be firm in both, half a palm long or a little more; and these two supports are pushed into the mouth of the marsh when one turns the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, with a more subtle and lighter appearance, should be made of an ebony or boxwood rod, according to the appearance of pliers; and it should have two joints, as you see, one palm long and two fingers wide; and when you want to open the jaw all the way with the instrument, place the woman on the bed, her feet together and her legs spread, then push the two joints together into the jaw, and hold the head of the instrument between her teeth; then work your hand with the instrument equally, as you would with pliers, according to the amount that you want to open the mouth of the jaw, until the ball does what it wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	These tools are all mounted on top, and they have many similarities; and when the mirrors have them aligned, the work is faster, and higher for people due to their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not ignore the tool that you have not aligned, for its need is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the second instrument is held in the child's mouth, it is necessary to command the patient to hold their tongue, and then to spit out the condition, and to hold your hands on their mouth and nose; and if they cough through it, well done.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If not, take the pot, and make a hole or cover, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the marsh, such as rue, anise, camomile, cassialigne and centoire; all these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked or boiled over the fire; then put a cloth or cover in the pot, and the other head in the mouth of the marsh, and let it sweat until the vapors come inside the marsh; then make him spit, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second hand is also affected.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if it remains after this cure, and is not completely healed, command the bailiff to have her right hand anointed with wheat oil or mussel shell, and then put it in its natural position, and find the second; and when she has found it, grasp it and stretch it gently and correctly, so that the marsh does not hinder the extraction; but move it lightly to the right and left, and then pull; it will come out and disappear.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the tongue of the mouth is injured, we have said the cure of expectoration and fumigation of herbs; and if she does not follow all that we have said, do not force her to vomit; but it is advisable that what is at the mouth of the tongue, you tie to the woman's cheek, then smear with the ointment tetrafarmaçon; so it will heal and be restored, and it will come out well. However, when she vomits if there comes a bad odor to the stomach and head, and causes pain.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	Therefore, it is advisable to use the following fumigations: none of the ancients have experienced fumigation of cresses and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument used to smoke the woman during retention of flowers and secondary is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it is like a wire resembling a horn, and one puts the head subtly into the fire, and the smokers are wide above the fire; and let the smoking be over the charcoal, and the worm until it is tired, and start another.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born who have not pierced the foundation, but one has stopped it with a subtle thorn: therefore it is necessary for the mother to pierce that thorn at its proper place, and not pierce too deep into the skin, and cover the wound so it does not touch it; then put on moistened linen in wine and oil, then care for the wound until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	If you doubt that it will not set, place or insert a splint, and let it lie for some time, and it should be supported as the child wants to go into the chamber.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And never comes this stoppage of pus from a wound or an abscess; if it should occur: if it is treated, as we have said of the splint.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula deep foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that come from below the foundation are nodular and thicker than those that come above the foundation or in the space between the two parts, if there is one fistula or more; and when that nodulation is ancient, it works, and becomes moister with white or subtle blood, and never are these fistulas persistent; and they are known by the fact that there is egestion or ventosities when the patient makes egestion, and perhaps some verses.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that perforate the bladder, and perforate the half of the penis; and they reach the joint of the hip, and perforate the buttock.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus one knows the fistula passing through the basement, and not passing: and it is that you must bore your finger or basement, and insert a thin needle of silver or iron into the fistula when there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if it has twisting, if you bore a thin tent of leather, or horsehair, until you feel the tent or the hair at your finger; and if you do not feel it, and there is no puncture egestion or ventositeit or ver, as we have said: saiches that it does not perforate more; then hurry to cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is perforated just above the bladder or just below the urethra, if it allows urine to pass, and cannot be cured by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is perforated just at the junction of the thigh, then the tendon comes down to the bone; if there is no twisting and the location of the pain is not clear, then it is as if it is already healed, and there is no cure by medicine or lancing; and in these perforated fistulas, there is no cure except labor, and the vanity of those who meddle with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In the one that is not yet perforated and is not yet old, in hope of healing by fire, as I have experienced, and it is that the pains are hidden between your hands on its back; and it lifts its legs up to its knees, and its knees are bent towards its belly; then boil a tent of lead, or of plaster if there is twisting, until you clear out the tent.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels pain around the base, it is necessary that you insert your second finger, as if you are trying to feel where it has perforated; and whether it is discovered or not, between your thumb and index finger, immediately remove it; since there is no need to struggle when it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	One can indeed heal many things, but this is rare; and the aid that is done, it is as if one warms the cauterizing iron according to the width of the fistula, as it has been said before; and bring all of it out through the fistula, until it reaches below the base; and do this twice or three times, until you know that those charred parts are removed, which are similar to an arrowhead; then cure the wound with a burr, until that char is gone, then cure the wound with an ointment.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If it is thus healthy, it is well.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If this is not healthy, then it cannot be made healthy; and if the tent is placed between, and does not perforate just where it should, at the base, and between the tent and the skin, there is a thick covering of char or of syfac, and you see the fistula pointing to where the covering ends; if the copper begins at the beginning of the fistula, and goes before the tent, and then the cautery after, until it reaches the top of the tent; and it will be delivered from the tent, and closed; then cleanse those char that seem like a quill of an eagle, and none remain.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if it does not return, and cuts between you and the work, then cauterize with fire or medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For the fire cauterization has two good things: it is to know, the burning of these wounds healed, and the stopping of blood and the scarring of moisture; then cure the tents that are moldy in butter or in ground-up herbs, until the wound is no longer bleeding, and when the charred wound has been placed in the wound; then cure the wound of boils soaked in hard charcoal, and these medicines are dry.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is healthy and does not return again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if the fistula comes from just above the foundation, and is away from the body, then press on your knee or foundation, and examine it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the tent, and between them is the thread or the suture or the charcoal, where it is close to piercing, if there are no other remedies but hope and faith, by the administration of one of the three methods: either you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut just above the foundation, or if you can put tents and treat it as before; and do not move too much in front, so that you do not cover the part that holds the foundation, and bring the excretions out through the way you want; then cure it, as we have said; perhaps it will be healed, or you remove that covering and clean it after it is cut below the foundation, or by tent or other instrument appointed; then clean the charred part of the wound, as much as you can; then study to restore the wound and to hold the fistula in the part before the foundation: if there is a lighter thing to the pain.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And sometimes fistulas are made in this way: and when you push the probe into the fistula, it is where it costs at the base of the skin above the flesh, then take a probe perforated at the top in this form:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And if you push the thread into it, and push the probe along the entire length of the fistula until it reaches the top.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is lost in the margin of the base inside, then pull out the thread of that perforated one, so that you push your own or base; and bring the top of the thread together with the other two, and hold them together, and let it lie one upon the other, and do not hold it once until the thread covers these charcoals that are between the two, and heal; then treat the wound until it is healed and healthy.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not pierce, then I will pierce it in all the ways that you can, unless it is too far gone.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it does not matter to make the bandage as soon as it is too far gone, and then treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The form of the spiculated bone that is made for the fistula is very sharp and one-sided; on the other hand, not, because we do not know how to make it as we should, as you can see here:
des emorroydes	from the emergency
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Emergency conditions are according to two ways: either they are within the foundation, like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and in the course of time they are filled with blood, and there are one or more, and they are above the foundation and at the top of the foundation; but those that are above have little moisture, and are filled with a little sharp or a little blood, and have the color of the flesh; and the treatment of those who have within the foundation is that you command the patient to urinate in other chambers, as long as the foundations do not become full, and they open their bladder; if you hurry, and hold them with pincers, or you hold them at your fingertip, then cover their roots; and if the spicules cannot be held by their moisture, then take them to a towel, or to cotton, or from a piece of cloth; and stretch them to both sides, then cover, and powder with any hot powders that are in the cauterant; or you cauterize them as it is said in the chapter of cauterants, then treat them with other treatments until they are healed; and if the foundations cannot be released, then clean the patient's wounds with a sharp and rough cloth to remove what is at the foundation, so that it can open widely; but if the spicules become hardened, and the foundation is strong from the foundation, then the treatment is light; and it is that you hold them at your fingertip or with pincers, and cover, then treat as we have said, until they are healed, and do not require incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary to mend the seam in this manner: take a thread of twisted wool, and pull it into an awl, and then draw the thread upwards and pierce the needle on the other side, and turn back the two ends of the thread away from the needle, and if they are wide; and straighten the thread firmly, then loosen the thread, and remove the needle, and do so with all the others, and leave one to let out the superfluous blood; then put above the foundation a cloth moistened in rose oil or wax, and put above the foundation, and command the patient to rest; and then let him lie until they are cooked, and when they are cooked, care for them with ointment and other care, until they are healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	dryly and without mercy, as the lions or foundations
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	often occurs dryly and without mercy in the intestines, and due to constriction of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary to scratch the skin with a sharp object or your nail above, which does not let it moisten; then treat it as it should be while it is dry; and if it cannot be dried, then begin the scraping stronger than before, until it is very clean, and then scrape; then treat it as it should be while it is clean.
dou fremit	high fever
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Formication is a small appearance that is twisted in the chest, and it goes up to the front; and once the froth finds it, and one feels it like the tremor of fever, and it comes into the whole body, and more so in the hands than in other parts.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the cure is that you take a needle of a goose feather, or a pen of a vulture very strong, and put that needle on the tremor, until the circle of the needle surrounds the tremor all around; then turn your hand to all the needle so that you cover all around the tremor, and let it out in front, and extinguish the tremor from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see that the bone is broken like a rain or iron rod in this form, and it is subtlely dislocated below and raised above:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	do not pierce it, to hold the two ends together and press them. And if you see that it burns, as it is before or in the chapter of cauterization.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the bandage
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	No one has ever made a bandage of silver or of lead, or of melted iron or of nails; and no one has ever made such small and large instruments, according to those that they will bring.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Therefore, those who are to be nursed in the care of children and those who are small and in pain, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of this poultice is small and large, if it is above wide, or the belly is tied according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And I have an unsatisfactory way or the belly is tied as you see, and the cloth is inside perforated; and on one side there are two holes, and on the other one; and the belly or put medicines from a beast’s bladder or parchment, and perforate all around with small holes, and between each hole I should have an inch of space, then fill in these holes with a thread of cord twisted into X or around, and gather the belly as if it is a goat; and when the medicine is inside, if the tie to the instrument before one strong thread, then poultice; and this is the form of the circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and oil the head of the poultice with oil or a similar substance, then press it gently; then the assistant should apply it to both hands together until it is completely visible, then remove the poultice, and relieve the pain in his legs at the same time, and if the swelling comes out as much as possible; and if he sleeps all night, it is a greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you apply the poultice in the illness of diarrhea of the belly, and the medicine hastens to come out, then restart it as long as it is healthy.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the blister is on the basement or abscess, then the plaster should be as thin as for a child; and this is the form of the thin plaster above where the skin is stretched:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have said in the section on wounds; now we will tell you about the treatment of hands and medicine, according to completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are different according to what they are made of, and according to the parts or wounds that are made, and from which they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things by which wounds are made are by being hit with a spear, and the cut of a sword and a dagger, or a lance or a staff or an arrow, or similar things; or those that are made according to the parts of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or the foot, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members; and I will tell you the treatment of each wound, and I will begin with simple wounds of the head, because its chapter will come later.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	When a simple wound comes or the head, and the bone is not broken, take care if it is an arrowhead or similar things, and the skin is completely torn and the wound is large, and you doubt slightly of abscess: if you do this immediately cleanse the wound itself if there is little blood from the wound, and cleanse the opposite side; and avoid the pains of repletion of wine and heavy foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he does not want to cleanse, let him eat soft food, and drink no wine, and do not change his drink; and put on the wound, if there is an abscess, rose oil or sterile wine; and if there is no abscess, put on the wound if it is fresh with all its blood, and it has not been moved by air, powder that I will say a little later; and if the wound has been moved, put on some ointments until it is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large and similar to a tailor's cut, and the lips cannot be closed by stitches, then close them with sutures, as I will say in wounds of the belly, from the stitching.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is exposed to the bone and can be moved but only held by a little piece, then cover it with a bandage; then treat the wound with medicine, and replace hard flesh in place of skin, and command the patient to eat soft foods, such as tests and cooked grain, like chickens, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you have a piece of skin or leather for a graft, and it does not touch the bone, then cover the whole with it, and pour in warm fat, then treat it; and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, without cutting it, and it cannot be stopped by medicines, then tie the artery, and if you have a piece of skin or leather for a graft, and it does not touch the bone, then cover the whole with it, and pour in warm fat, then treat it; and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, without cutting it, and it cannot be stopped by medicines, then tie the artery, and if you have a piece of skin or leather for a graft, and it does not touch the bone, then cover the whole with it, and pour in warm fat, then treat it; and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, without cutting it, and it cannot be stopped by medicines, then tie the artery, and if you have a piece of skin or leather for a graft, and it
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the light cure is used: and you should put this powder that sours as soon as the air touches it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the manner of the powder is as follows: take incense one part; dragon's blood two parts; live chalk three parts, and grind the powder finely, and fill the wound, and hold it in place until it has healed well and joined to all its skin; then bind it well, and leave it without movement, unless it swells; for one should not remove the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And one never uses chalk alone when one does not have incense or dragon's blood, but that the air has not moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the wound has moved, immediately apply this powder; but if it is not present, use some ointments digested with honey, or flour of barley made into a thick paste with honey, until it dries out; then proceed with other treatments until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if the broken bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then straighten it with fine needles; and I will tell you about the main fractures later.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound comes to the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between this and the main fracture, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is a bone, there is no other remedy than to let the care, and not put anything restricting, for it hurts bones and draws them; and do not put anything sharp on the wound, for the substance of bones is cold, and its continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member; but rather use soft medicine, such as chalk washed in warm sweet water, and mixed with rose oil, and the linen washed in warm sweet water, and other stones of this kind, and moist bandages.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then use a bandage and bind it until it is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	If the wounds are deep and bleeding heavily and full of blood, prick or cut lower down; if the artery is cut, and blood flows out, stop it, and bandage it, and cauterize it if necessary; and if the spine of the neck is cut, or the jugular vein, and the conducting vessel is damaged, do not touch the neck but return it to its natural shape; then gradually restrain it, and leave it for some time, then treat the wounds with ointments until they are healed; and if the wound has made an impression in the bone, remove it; and if there are pieces of bone, remove them all if you can, and if you cannot, leave them until the wound heals, and align it; and if the wound is fresh, powder with the powder that I have said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if he has bone in the wound and there is a fistula, then treat as I have described in his chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound from arrow or sword
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is from an arrow or sword wound, and the wound is deep, look to see if the hairs are growing through the wound: cut them away if the wound is mortal; and if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, do not put powder in the first hour for the blood that it does not clot before it comes back to the heart, and stop the pain; but apply attractive ointment twice a day; and if you have no ointment, put old cotton in the wound to draw out the moisture, and let it sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more; then there will be no spasm, nor will there be any trembling of the heart from elsewhere; and when you see the good dispositions, cut away that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Cure the wounds and other treatments, as long as they are healed; and if they cannot be healed, and work, then make incisions where there is fistula; if the treatment is as it should be.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from an arrow or sword cut, and it is simple, or pierced in the front or back, then treat it as it should be; if it is large, sew it up; and if it is small, powder it, and if it has entered the bone and has broken pieces, if the wound can be closed, and if not, let the wound rot, it will ease the extraction; and for other wounds in other limbs, use judgment as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	belly rupture
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	The rupture of the belly is great and medium and small; from the large wound the intestines or the nerves of the intestines often escape, by which the incarceration of them; and the stitching is more painful, and sometimes a small wound is worse than a large one, because one can more easily put back the intestines, if they are not put back at once; because the intestines swell quickly when they feel the cold, if they are put back more slowly, and for this reason the middle wound is worse, because it is more difficult to stitch the intestines to their place as in other II And there are four ways of healing the rupture of the belly: the two common stitches are in the seam of the belly, and the stitching of the other wounds of the body and the two other stitches are common to other wounds; and therefore they are more appropriate with the stitching of the belly, and I will say one by one and explain.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small, and nothing of the intestines is torn, and it is easy to set, it is done by one of the two methods: either by the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are inflated by the heat.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is hot, heat the intestines in this manner: moisten a sponge or some mild cloth only with cold water, or boil in hot sand and copper and spice, and roast the intestine until it is softened; and never do this restraining, and it is better to let it cool before using.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	When you see the swelling depart, if the internal organs are dry or high and misaligned, because by this they enter quickly; and if it cannot enter, make a small incision with the instrument used to remove worms; and the first care is to still the tail, which we should not cut without great necessity, and this is the instrument for cutting: if you cut from within outwards and not inwards, and turn out the form.
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	When the wound is enlarged and the internal organs have fallen out, if you can put them back in place according to their natural form, it is good.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is wide, and it is in the part of the body away from the belly, then it is necessary to place the injured part on the patient's back, and raise their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the part of the body away from the belly, then raise the head and the worst part higher than the other parts, and thus manage as I said for large and medium-sized wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	When the wounds are small, apply what you have at hand to clean the entire wound with a needle or more, depending on the size of the wound, leave a space of about an inch from the edge of the wound, and then stitch the two edges together with a strong thread; and when you have sewn them together, leave a space of about an inch, and then tie them together with a double thread. Then sew the edges of the wound evenly, leaving a space of about an inch, and then tie them together as you did before. Do not place the needles too far from the edge of the skin and the flesh, so that they do not puncture the wound before the stitching. Then cover the edges of the needles with bandages or cloths to keep them in place, and leave them until the wound is closed; this method of sewing with needles is more suitable for small wounds, as it requires only one needle. The second method of sewing is common, and it is that you bring together the two edges of the skin and the two edges of the flesh to a needle or a strong thread; and when you have sewn them together, remove the needle from the part where you started, in the way that one stitches with needles; and leave a space between each stitch the width of a finger. This method of sewing is suitable for wounds on the belly, which I sewed up for someone who had a wound from a knife, which was more than an inch wide, and it was cutting into the intestines by more than an inch.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I brought back the intestine after it had been for 24 hours, and the wound was dressed with 15 days, and cured, and was healed.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And the miracle was that he thought he would die, and it was a miracle; and I did not cure him with any ointment, for I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicine; and I put clean cotton twice a day over the wound, and washed it with honey water until he was healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Or I will tell you the two main ways of sewing: take the needle, and the thread from the part in front of the skin; when it has pierced the edge on both sides, then put the head of the suture or stitch where you have inserted the needle, and make it pierce from the other part of the part inside the skin; and the understanding of this sewing is that you sew as the furrier makes the furs, and that you leave one side of the suture once, and then repeat it on the other, until the sewing is all finished.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second way of sewing, which Galen properly calls, is such that anyone can do, who assembles the two parts together naturally, and applies one of the main threads to the other main thread, in a similar manner: stick an needle or main thread near, and make it pierce that part alone, and leave the two ends of the main thread; then turn the needle, and make it pierce from the part forward just above, the two ends of the main thread; then make it pierce both from the part forward just above, in two other threads that are on the other side; and this is the most common way of sewing.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	People who say this word, and no one witnesses it, that one should sew the belly with two needles, or each with a thread; and one should put one needle from one side, and the other from the other, in the manner of those who stitch corroies; and sewn so that when the tear is in the belly, it is more painful than other tears of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgment of the wound is as follows: and it is that when you cut the fresh wound to its full depth, if the physician has moved it, then reset the intestine and the wound; then put on powder mixed with charcoal, and if the physician has moved it, then apply any ointment that is present, until the wound closes; then bandage it, and be sure of the sifac, and the mirach; then treat the wound as the others, until it is healed; and if you do not have medicines, then as soon as it begins to heal, apply cotton, and move it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you have no other skill in many situations where the wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound does not make communication with the main members, it is necessary to apply a light bandage soaked in warm or rose oil, and place it around the wounds, and remove the swellings; and if it feels pain or putrefaction in the belly, and often happens, then you should dress it with black wine, and immediately if the putrefaction comes to the intestines; and perforate within, and scrape out what is inside, and it is lighter to heal than the small ones.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine called "jeun" cannot be healed when it is bare, and this is because of the plants that are in it, and because of the subtlety of all the body, and its approach to the nature of nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the intestine jumps out of the wound, put it back as the intestine, while it is fresh; and if it is old and turned to black, then you must tie the limb that is black, so that no blood comes out, for it has veins and arteries; then cover what is between the gut, and put the two ends hanging from the part away from the wound until the extraction when the intestine dies, and the wound closes.
de la routure dou boueil	of the break of the bone
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is punctured, and the wound is small, if it can be restored to some men, for I saw that a man was gutted or stabbed in the belly; and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and he became fistula, and inside there was egestion and ventosity; I put care according to what I could, and did not cease to subtilize until it was healthy, and the others seemed better.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw him sewn up, I doubted that the pains were not in his belly; and there was no pain, but he remained in better dispositions, and eating and drinking; and some experimenters said that when one has a small wound in the intestine, it should be bound in this manner: take a sharp instrument, then gather the lips of the wound, and when the sharp instrument opens the mouth, put it above the two lips, so that it holds its mouth above; and then cover the wound, and it is held so that it cannot slip, then put the other sharp instrument in that manner as before, until the wound is completely closed; and through the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	If the bone breaks in the intestine, and no harm comes to the wound, and it can be tied with a thin thread that is taken from the intestine of an animal, in this manner: take the end of the intestine that is very dirty, and then tie it to the end of this thread with a thin silk thread, then pull the thread through the needle, and sew the intestine, and draw it together; and this method of stitching is no different from the way of faith and hope; and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the larger intestines, there is no remedy or healing, except for subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a fistula or where it is
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	all wounds or abscesses, when they close, are universally called "fistulas", and specifically when they are cut open and opened up.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And a fistula is according to its hardness and whiteness, where one does not feel pain, and is also cut like the quill of an eye; and sometimes it is clearly open, and sometimes thick; sometimes small, and sometimes enough; and I have spoken about this in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and there is no pus, is only due to one of the EIGHT causes: that is, by the smallness of the blood or flesh; or because of its malice; or because there is hard pus inside, and on the lips, that does not let new pus grow; or there is too much drainage; or the wounds are proud, and the matter is of bad quality; or the medicine is not good in the cure; or because the corruption is like a pestilence; or because the property in the region is late digestion, and late healing, and is ejected by nature; or there are veins or bones: and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	It is necessary for me to tell you about the treatment of fistulas made by the work of hands.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Fistulas can occur in all members of the body; for there are fistulas that come to large veins, and to arteries, and to nerves, or to the face, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to any of the costal bones, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet; and if they come to the property of the main member, and similar ones.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	All fistulas of this kind are of great harm, and there is only labor and ignorance; and if there is any fistula that does not come from the place that I have said, and you have confidence in the cure, and you know how to treat it, take a tin of lead or iron, if the fistula is straight, if the quarter; and if the fistula is twisted, take a thin tent of plaster, because the plaster plies around the twisting; and if the fistula has many holes and you cannot well cover it with tents, clean it out by one of the holes, for the moisture goes from one hole to another, and cleans it; then treat it properly to your power, that you know whether there is bone or nerve, and if it is in front, and ask the patient carefully about the pain he feels when you press with your hand, and the location where he feels it; and when you will know truly the location where it is, and if it is far from joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, treat according to what I have told you, and remove the faulty part and the corrupted parts that are inside; and then cure as long as it is healed, and if the fistula is deep at the right place, it is necessary to cut it open, as much as you can, then put soft tents in medicine wool, and push them up to the top of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the superfluous part that remains at the bottom; and then put ointments of clean, whole oil, until they are healed; and if it is not healed by this, then cauterize as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted from the fistula, cut.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If the vein or nerves cause you pain or harm to your principal limbs, as we have said; and if the tooth is exposed, and there is corruption and blackness, if you clean the corruption so much that it is all removed, then cure the things injured with charms until they are healed; and if they are not healed, and remain as before, cut off as much as you can: if it reveals and wants to come out as far as you can, and remove all the corruption, then restore the limb; and if it is thus healed, it is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If not, cut off as much as you can; there is no other remedy than patience; and if there is a small bone corrupted, and you can pull it out with pincers, then straighten it with the appropriate instrument, and if there are many bones, take them all out, leaving none behind; and if the moisture makes it contrary, and there is no error or fear, use copper and moisture and charms, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot remove them in an hour, apply something soothing to the wound, and leave it until the bone is completely surrounded by flesh, and then the bones will be more easily set; and if it is a large bone, such as a leg or thigh, wait until the corruption is completely rotted through the bone, then reopen the wound; and if there is a great part of the corruption and comes to the edge of the bone; if it should be so, cover all around the corruption, and cure it until it is sound; and I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you can take example and help in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	The young man was around thirty years old, who had pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the chest, until the matter reached the leg, and it was filled with a large abscess, and there was no reason to open; but the doctor by their folly opened so high that the abscess opened, and there was much matter flowing out, and became a fistula, and many more were sweating from the body and moisture from the chest; and many more doctors were consulted within two years, and there was no remedy in the art of hands, so that I was called, and saw his leg and the medicines with which they were treating him, and what was flowing through the pores had great heat; and the young man's chest became red, and had a yellowish color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I pitched a tent in one of these openings, and then searched all the openings, and found that one came against the other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I therefore took care, and cut into one of the openings until I discovered a part of the bone, and found it rotten and perforated, and the corruption was coming to the bone from within; I saw that the rotten bone appeared to me, and thought there was no other corruption, except what I had seen; and I began to treat the wound with soothing medicines for a long time, but could not heal it; then I returned, and discovered the bone as before, and found the continued corruption in the bone, and saw it, and then removed it, and I was unable to heal the limb; but I could only cut around a palm of the bone, and treat it entirely, then I applied medicines; it became healthy and healed quickly, and did not require further treatment except for the weakness of the pain, which could not bear it, and the fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For the evacuation of blood often occurs, but he was completely healed, and in the place of the bone grew a hard horn, and it was of good disposition and caused no harm nor contradiction at all, neither to the other nor to the coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be done in this way: take a bandage, and stretch it at the top of the bone that opens, and command him to extend it upwards; and put another thicker bandage than the first one above the bandage that is on the bone, and stretch the top, so that you can remove the rotten bandage from below, and reveal the rotten bandage above the bone where you see it should be, so that it does not corrode the bone; and put a poultice or a cloth outside the bone to cover the rotten bandage; and it should be as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and it should be done again another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	If the tooth is rotted and cannot be opened, and the rotting is in the middle or in one part, remove the whole tooth; then apply a cloth to the affected part, and stitch from one part to the other the corruption, and let the cloth cover the corruption for a short distance as we have said; and if the rotting is in the joint, cover the joint with the corruption, and stitch the bone or the part it contains on the other side; and if the rotting is in the continuation of the two joints, there is no other way than to cover it; and if the rotting is at the tip of the hand or foot, this thing is very difficult, but nevertheless you must ask about this corrosion, how it opens; and clean it in all ways that you can, but do not make the vein or nerve against each other; and know that the instruments for covering these bones are many, according to the shape of the bones and the appearance of the teeth, and their size and subtlety, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness; and therefore you must prepare a tool for every kind of work, and know that the work will show you the tool that you have to use, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of diseases; so consider the tool that you have to use according to what it is suitable for.
dou feu	For the fire cautery
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The patients who have been bitten or stung by a poisonous creature, either by the bite itself or by the creature's fangs; and when you have medicine to treat that corrosion by the cure of medicines, and it does not help, then you must amputate that member up to the joint where the corrosion comes from, so that the poison may escape through the wound, either by death or by the greater malice, which is the lack of the member; and the signs are that the members turn black, so that it seems as if they were burned by fire, and become darker afterwards, then those corrosions of the member spread from one to another, and take hold of the whole body; if you hurry to amputate, and if the corrosion is at the head of the joint, then amputate and do not give them any space for the venom to reach their hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	If it comes from the hand, if the cloth is at the joint, so that the corrosion does not come up to the arm; and if it comes to the arm, if the cloth is at the shoulder; and if it passes the shoulder, it is death, and there is no other remedy but the quantity of its virtue; and thus do all that when the corrosion comes out: if it comes in the first joint, if the cloth after the other joint; and if it comes out, if the cloth covers all the wound; and if it goes up the leg, if the cloth is at the knee joint; and if it comes over the knee, there is no other remedy but to let the painful part die; and the way of the cloth or the bandage is such that you tie it above and below, and extend some bandages on one side, and some on the other, and wet the char between the two bands to the width of a span, until the bone is exposed; then the cloth or bandage, and put linen cloths on each part so that the wound does not touch the healthy skin, and it comes to other injury and abscess.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And if blood comes out when you are working, cauterize the wound quickly, or put on some powders that stop bleeding; then return to your medicine until it is completed, then bind the injured member with a flexible bandage, and treat it until it is healed; and I will tell you what happened to a man in great pain: he had a black spot that seemed like fire burning, and that corrosion first came to his left side, taking over the whole side; and when the honorable men saw the corrosion, they covered the wound, and he was healed; and long afterwards the corrosion came to the right side of his hand, and it came to me, and I put on him things that repercuss after cleansing the body, and I could not stop the corrosions; and he thought that I would cut off his hand, and I did not want to, because I had hope of repercussing the matter; and he also doubted that if I cut off his hand, he would not die, for the virtue of the man was weak; and he despairing, returned to his land, and covered his hand, and was healed; and I have told you this only because it is necessary to do something else if one has the task.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	Never does an abscess form in a wound that is too narrow, and it lasts so long that it causes a great gathering of pus; then it bursts and perforates, and the pus jumps out, and the wound remains open like a wound; and the skin above is also as thin as cloth, and does not cover the bone, nor the nerve, and such diseases are called "sinus", and are not called "fistula"; but if it is so long that it reaches the bone from the outside, it is called "fistula"; and the skin is such that you must cut around it, and exactly when it is thin, like cloth; and it does not heal due to its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	If the skin has hardened and the corruption is not yet fully formed, and the skin is charred, then the following remedy should be used: check if the breasts are large, and the nipples have a bad smell, then use an Egyptian remedy made as follows: take equal parts of milk, oil, and lard, and cook them together in a vessel over the fire until the medicine turns red and thickens like honey; then add water according to your need, and make it into a poultice, either thin or thick, and apply it to the breast, and bind it tightly; leave the medicine on for two hours, then remove it by sprinkling; do this many times until the breasts are clean and soft; and if the pain is too great, and the Egyptian remedy and the water of ashes do not help, then use a poultice of honey and wine, where the honey has the property of cleaning and washing, and the wine makes the flesh soft; and when you have done this, and you are sure that the breast is clean, then use a plaster made of frankincense and rose oil and wine; or use some other medicines and ointments, as I have described their properties and uses; and if the nipple of the breast is small, and the clister cannot enter, then enlarge it with a needle a little, and put in a tent of Egyptian ointment or basilicon, until it is large enough to enter; and if the wound is too large, then leave it alone until the leather or the clister can enter, and if the discharge from the breast is above, then cover it with a cloth or the lower part of the leather where it is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	For when the bone is broken, do not let it heal crookedly; and if you cannot cover the wound as you see fit, then arrange it in such a way that the bone heals at its lowest point where it is broken, for when the bone is broken, do not let it heal crookedly, and if you cannot cover the wound as you see fit, then arrange it in such a way: that the bone heals smoothly downwards, and leave nothing of the bone; and take consolidative medicines to put on the wound, and lay them over the linen cloth that covers all the wound; then cover the forces at the end of the wound with a larger piece of linen according to the size of the wound, and place it on the wound to align the bone, and do not remove the large cloth until after many days, one time; and the one who is on the wound should often take it off to relieve the bone, and see if there is poison or little or much, or digested, or undigested; and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and whether there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been extended in a certain way and you see that nature has healed over the wound, then remove the bandage and approach the health; and then remove it in the morning, or the next day, and when you remove the wound, change the other cloth, and renew the poultice.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if his breast becomes full of undigested food after many hours, separate the breasts so that they do not swell.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons are cut after long time, do not despair of health, for health approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are men who take long to heal their wounds, and those who do the opposite; and if his breast becomes full of undigested food after many hours, separate the breasts so that they do not swell; and if his breasts are slow to heal and are distant, then apply moist substances in substance and dry in virtue, such as ointment definite, for there is a great part of glass, and this is the last medicine; take ointment definite, and make it with rose oil, and the same wine boiled in substance; then cook and use it; and the same thing is made with honey when it is cooked and enlarged, when there is no ointment definite present, or you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind them, and powder over the honey as it is on the fire; then apply the cloth to the breast, and use it; and never administer an aristocrat long, and roots of lily celestial, which is also like flour and hundred; and use simple or composite: grind them, and make powder, and put over the honey that I have said, and use it; and if the cure is long and is not cured by this cure, then separate the corruption that is in front, and make impression on the bone, or on hard members, or on limbs; so the cure of the cure of fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the elbow
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Panarice is an abscess that arises from the elbow due to a pouch of the hand, or a wound, or by chance in other places; and when it is opened, and no care is taken, if the abscess comes out, and corrodes and flows so much that it reaches the root of the elbow, and perhaps corrodes the entire thing; and then there are pains like those of the marrow, and the patient has a large swelling, and the color is red.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the cure does not improve, then you must cut off all the excess that remains of the elbow, then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cauterization is a great help if the bones are healthy and the joint is sound; and if the joint is close to the flesh and begins to prick and swell, it is necessary that you remove the flesh that does not point to the joint, and cut off the swollen part, and apply hot and corrosive medicines on top of the remaining flesh until it heals.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corrosion is in the bone, it must be cut out and removed, for as much as the bone rots, it cannot heal; and if you see that both are rotting, then cut out the rotten parts as previously mentioned, and treat until it heals; and if it is fierce, and swollen, and the patient feels great pain, it is necessary to first heal the wound; then cut the joint carefully in small pieces, and make sure that the cut does not reach the flesh that is outside the joint, for the hairs would feel too much pain; and if there is, put something on top that soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain of a sore hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The injuries that arise in the hands of some men are all crooked, and sometimes they have bones, and sometimes they have thorns, and sometimes they have nails, and none of them arise at the root of the joint or in any of the fingers.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Those who arise in no part of the finger do not move, and those who arise at the joint of the finger, sometimes move; the length of the crooked one is light, like this: cut it at its root with a wide saw.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Those who arise at the root of the joint are difficult to cure: if you take it with a hook.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For those born with or should have at the back not, it is necessary to first cut the round bone well to the bone, then cut the bone to a suitable silk for this, then care until it is healed.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The same that comes together in both cases comes from birth, or from the healing of a wound, or from burning by fire, or from similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	If it is necessary to cut that which is diseased, so that the part returns according to its natural forms; then place between two tents or moistened cloths in rose oil, so that it does not heal; or you place between two pieces of thin leather, until the part is healed, as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	When someone comes to you with either of his hands, if it is dislocated, then fix it as it should be.
des vils	of the fingers
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	The veins are large and swollen, filled with excessive melancholy, which come from many members of the body; and more so in the legs of those who stand and work and carry, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you should never give them any purgation of bile, and then the healthy from the basilica.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The cure of iron is according to the two methods: one is that you remove it, and draw out all the black blood; and the other method is that you open the vein, and draw out all of it.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The belly is done in this way: first, the first leg of high hot mustard, so that the big one is not subtly removed, then strain the leg with the bad one below the hip; then cut the vein in the left, or II, or III, of a wide knife, then release and pull out the black blood to your hand, from one to the other, as much as the power of the bad one can bear; then tie it up, and command that he be anointed with foods infused with black coal; and then repeat the evacuation and cleaning when the veins are flat, and not painful.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The treatment of the shoulder is as follows: if there is much hair on the affected leg, first shave it, then place it in hot water or bath until it turns red and the veins swell; if you don't have a bath, heat it over the fire, and then apply a warm cloth to the vein at the back of the knee or in the lower part of the thigh; then rub the skin with the palm of your hand until it appears when touched; it will appear red and black, and look like a white rope; then pull it out from the skin until it is clear of the skin, and then wrap it lightly with a bandage, then apply warm cloths to the other side for about three days; then scrape the skin over the vein until it appears, then lift it to the elbow, and lift it again with a bandage as you did before; then apply another dressing, or more if you have experience, then lift it, and apply warm cloths to the other side of the elbow, then pull it out and lift it to the second dressing; then remove the dressing from the wound in pieces, until it is all removed, then apply a new dressing; and if you cannot pull and lift it, insert a large needle through the thread very tightly, and pull and lift it, and turn your hand from one side to the other until it is all removed; be careful not to let it stick, for if it sticks, it cannot be pulled or lifted, and it will cause harm to the wound; and when you have treated it all, place a soft cloth moistened with wine and rose oil on the wound, and keep it until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the eye is contracted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight as we have said, then you must torment it but do not cover it; and treat it as we have previously described.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The form of iron that is used to cover the eye if it is hooked, and does not cut much, so as not to cover the vein; and it is large in size, because if it were too fine, it would cover the vein, but if it is large as we have said, and this is the form:
de la voinne civile	of the vein civil
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is injected in the legs, in hot parts where there are no herbs or trees, and in dry land where there is no moisture; and by chance it may grow in other parts than in the legs, and if it has the pus that comes out of the skin, as it comes from within the flesh and bones, inject between the skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are such that it comes in the leg a very great inflammation, then the limb changes, and the vein begins to issue, like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the vein opens, it is necessary that you wrap around a piece of cloth of one and a half to two fingers wide, and wet, and leave the cloth on the leg, and every time it is not too long, if you wrap it around the cloth, and wet; and if it is too long, cut a part of it, and wrap the remaining part, and do not cover it at its root, until it is all out; for if you cover it, it will return to the vein, and bring abscess and inflammation or the limb, and bad disease; therefore it is necessary that it be treated little by little, and nothing remains or scarred; and this vein does not occur when it is treated from the palm of hand, or ten, and some have come to me, to which it issued from ten palms long, and when you cover it, it swells up or bursts, and perforates to the bottom, so that everything comes out; and let the matter that is inside be emptied, and administer medicines in the form of injections for inflammation any day, then cure as with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And never apply it to this vein again, and especially when it opens at the joint of the thumb, or the thumb itself, and there is much pain, and it falls back; then cure as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	of verses that are born between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called in our land "cow disease", because it often affects cows, and it is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and goes through the entire body going up and down, and is felt in each member after another, until it reaches the skin where it went, and jumps out; and it is caused by some humors, like worms and lumbrics and ascarides or intestinal worms; and its evil is unknown, because as it goes through the body, and it goes up to the head, and it comes to the brain, perhaps it enters, and destroys the brain; and this has happened many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see that the patient needs to be cured and drawn, it is necessary that you place the limb above and away from a very tightly bound bandage, then cut through and remove it, and if the blood comes out in front of the char, you do not remove it, but cauterize with fire until it dies; and the greatest harm it does is that it corrupts the oil, as we have said; and if you see it coming or near the oil, hold it away from it firmly, then cut through and remove it; and it is necessary to use the remedy of healing of bodies with solutions of medicines for the bad humors for the evils.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of the pain that comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is called in our land "windiness", and it is a pain that comes to some members, and then moves from member to member; and I saw what I will tell you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to a sick woman, and I discovered one of her arms, and I saw a small swelling in the armpit of that arm; and soon after, I saw it grow as high as a worm at the shoulder, much faster than anything, just like living silver when it cuts through flesh. The pain departed from that arm, and went into the shoulder, and then a little later spread throughout the body, until it came to the other arm; then she told me that she turned inside out around the body, as I saw.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was greatly amazed at how it moved from one member to another, for I had never seen this disease move in this way.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	However, I had heard that it often moved from one limb to another, but I had never seen it move in this way. I thought that it might be because the woman had a dry body, and her veins were exposed, and because of this constraint, it appeared only to those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and covered veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see this disease and the pain it causes, if it appears as we have said, then place the limb above and below quickly, and then cover it with a cloth until the constraint of the venous blood is relieved; and cauterize the limb; and if you do not see it in your eyes, then treat the cause of the venous blood as with fetid pills, and serapin pills, and similar others.
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are various, according to their resemblance and according to the type of animal they pierce.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The variety of them is such that there are those with large points, and small, and barbed, and sharpened; and those with two angles, and those with tails, and those with pieces; and the one that pierces any member as follows: or in a principal member, if it pierces the brain, spine, liver, lung, stomach, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When it pierces any of these members, and the sign of death, which I will tell you about later, appears: it is necessary that you attempt the extraction of this arrow, because many die afterwards in various positions; and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not stuck, remove it, and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the signs of the head when the arrow pierces and passes through the bone, and the syphilitic sores that are above the head, are blindness and dizziness and spasms and burning of the tongue, and spasms and confusion of mind, and vomiting of bile; and perhaps without strength in the nose or the ears; and perhaps also the speech and voice; and a white discharge from the wound that looks like pus, and also blood that looks like bruised char; and if these signs appear to you, then take care of the patient and remove the arrow if it is not already out.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The signs of a broken rib when it breaks or pierces the chest are that it is near the right breast, and feels like it has been pierced by something hard, not soft; and perhaps the rib also moves like a chicken's wing, and there is black blood, and cold sweat, and syncope: therefore, without doubt, the patient will die.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign that the arrow has not been removed is that without any pain bubbles come out of the wound, and the throat swells, and the colors change, and the patient gasps for breath and seeks the cool air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrowhead is lodged in the quilt of the worst kind, it is near the small ribs; and it causes great pain and shortness of breath; and they move all the members of the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrowhead is lodged in the stomach, by chance, it may cause undigested meat to come out of the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrowhead is lodged in the belly, and it does not come out through the intestines, there is no hope of cure or extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrowhead is lodged in the bladder, and the urine comes out and flows from it, and the pain is very great: the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limbs, such as the arm and neck and throat and shoulder and back and spine and buttocks and knee and foot, and similar limbs, are safe according to various positions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or the artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me, because of what you were doing otherwise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to a man with an arrow that went through his arm into the root of the nose: I tried to remove it, and took it out from the other side, outside the ear fat, and he was cured without any problem.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And to a man who had an arrow in his fat outside of the paper outside, and the arrow was replaced, and he could not reach it except with the point towards the top, and the arrow was large like a Turkish bow, all of it light without ears; the wound was cleaned, and no bad accidents came to him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And to a Christian who had an arrow in his neck, and the arrow was Arabic with ears: I cut off the barbs, and subtly removed it until I removed it, and the Christian was healed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And to a man who had an arrow in his head or stomach, and I thought he would die; and after he had passed thirty days, his condition did not change; I cut above the arrow, and pulled it out, and removed it, and there was no bad accident.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you wish to help a man who has an arrow sticking out or on his back, and the wound was closed over; and the arrow remained inside, and did not change its natural positions, nor found any harm in any of its natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And if you wish to help another man who had an arrow sticking out in his face, and the wound was closed over; and it remained thus to suffer great pain; and many similar cases.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And treat an arrow to the man of the prince, the king, who had it in his neck, and was slightly tilted to the right side; and the arrow was completely healed I was called for after it was three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	If the wound is very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I stretched it with a very thin tent, and I did not feel anything; and he felt no pricking or pain outside his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was from the tip of the arrow; I put under his eye a mustard plaster to draw out the poison, because the eyes did not swell; and I saw the arrows in his eyes.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I left the plaster on for a while, and immediately healed the wound; and the hairs remained long and stretched, until he felt the arrow inside his nose; and he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I placed the medicine of corrosive acid on the wound with my hands, as long as it was open, and tested it, and felt the head of the arrow that was stuck in the shoulder; then I applied the corrosive acid again through the opening of the wound, until the arrow appeared visibly; and it healed well within four months, and then I extracted the arrow, and my own tools, and could not remove it; therefore, I continued to subtilize and engineer in various ways of instruments, until I got a good tool on the day after, according to what its form will come at the end of this chapter, until I removed the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And the doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored: I restored it nonetheless, and it was soaked in the wound, and the pain was completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Or I told you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you might place your care on what I did not say, for the books cannot comprehend everything; but wise masters know well a few great things, and on what is present and lacking, they find new work, and new instruments, in the understanding of strange things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows do not issue from members or they are not fixed firmly because according to the two methods: either by the way they enter, or by another part; and the one that has come out by the way it enters, is an arrow entering in its own flesh, and has never been removed.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if she does not jump now, let her remain until the charcoal is poured around her and she is suffocated; and also if she is stuck in the bone, and cannot come out, let her remain thus for some time, and move her every day; and then she will jump, and if she does not jump, pierce all around with a subtle foret, until the bones around are expanded, and then draw it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is stuck in the head bone, and goes towards one of the bellies of the brain, and any of the accidents that I have mentioned cause harm to the patient: do not draw it out immediately, but leave it thus for some time, because if the arrow comes towards the face, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is not lodged in the bone only, and does not come out immediately, and remains for several days without any bad accident, then use the method to pull it out.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is deeply lodged and cannot come out, then apply tar to the wound as I have told you; then treat the limb until it is healed.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is lodged in the body where it cannot be seen, then apply tar to the entire wound; and if you feel it, then remove it with any suitable instrument; and if you cannot because of the narrowness of the wound, and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein, then leave it until the wound is large enough; and remove the arrow if you can, and if it has ears attached to hold it in place, then cut off the flesh that is stuck to it with a sharp knife, and then break or pry open the ears of the arrow, until you can remove it; and be careful not to break the arrow when you remove it.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it once, then pull the shoulder back to its place, because the extraction is painful.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the bleeding from the wound makes it difficult for you, follow the advice we gave in this chapter about its treatment; and guard against incising the nerve and vein, and use caution as you pull the arrow out, whether quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and put the hairs back according to their original form when the arrow fell out, for this is the greatest help that there is, and if you cannot do it, then put them according to what the signs show.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The arrow that comes from another part, where it opens nothing of it, or the skin is swollen in a place so that one can see or feel it: cut then above, as far as the spines can take, and then extract it: if it breaks now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is stuck in the bone, round your hand and push it into the bone, until it enters the bone, then expand the bone, then remove it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot come out, leave it still, then start extraction again until it comes out; and if the arrow is in the arrow, and you see that it is stuck, and you administer gently, if you are administering the instrument with a pointed end, so that the point of the arrow enters the end of the instrument; and then pull out, and if the arrow is caught, push the instrument in at the entering point to facilitate extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is stuck, it is necessary that you cut out the entire wound where the poison is, if possible, then treat the wound as appropriate.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow pierces or sticks in the belly or bladder or ribs, and it is close, and you can cut over it, if possible; and do not cut the vein and nerve, and then extract it, and then clean the wound, if necessary; and treat the wound until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the arrows used to extract arrows is similar to an eagle's beak, and here is the shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many ways to do it: large, medium, and small, according to the amount of blood.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the bleeding wound is like the beak of a bird, to put at the tip of the blood, as in this way:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The shape of the pins to insert and to hold is like this:
des voinnes dou cors communes	Veins of common blood
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	There are XXXI veins that are commonly sought, of which there are XVI heads, that is: II ears that are after the ears, which are called the "herbech"; and the II arteries that are in II temples apparent; and II veins that are in II armor of II eyes, which are called «aspires»; and the vein that is in the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the nose; and the II ligaments that are on the collar; and the II veins that are in the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins that are called «augeherich»; and II veins that are outside the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins that are usually drained commonly are V in each arm: one is the cephalic, and it is on the right side, and is called "the great vein" by the people; and the middle one is called "the basilic", and is composed of the cephalic and the basilic, and is called "the vein of the chest" by the people; and the basilic is on the left side, and is called "the belly vein", and is above the foscile, and is the one that is drained, which opens clearly above the pouch.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the salvatelle is the vein that is between the earlobe and the anulaire, and it is on the right arm; and in the leg and knee there are three veins: one is outside the pouch of the right side costeit, and the second sophene which is at the elbow of the left side costeit; and the vein that is called "nesse", which is at the elbow of the other costei; and in the other leg there are three veins.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	For the shoulder joint, which is behind the ears, it helps with ancient enemas and headaches; and the quality of the saint's remedy, as I told you, and is that you remove the main pain, and rub the shoulder where the ears are on one side of the shoulder: then press the ears against a string, until the two ears appear behind the shoulder in two directions from the top: then give it to your hand, and where you feel the hair from your hand, if it is loose; then take the needle, and push it outside the ear, then lift your hand above the ear, and rub and the skin and the ear well, it should be evenly divided, and make the blood flow until you see it; then strain and tie, as long as it is healed; and I have already said the incision and the cauterization in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	The treatment of the second arteries that are in the two temples, it is to puncture them with an old needle, and soak, and stop them with a custom-made powder on those eyes; and the quality of the treatment is as I say: and it is that the hairs strangely stretch their neck, so that the two veins are clearly visible; and it feels like the fur is out of place, then sign of itching; then lift the skin over the vein in the top of your finger index, and pull the needle out, and lift the vein up, and cover, as you have done in the other two veins, and do the blood clotting according to your necessity; then remove the hairs, and put your finger on the vein for an hour, then put on cotton; and then bandage it, and leave it until it is healed; and we have spoken of its coping and removal, and beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The salve of the vein of the forehead is as valuable as the salve for cephalic diseases of the face, such as headaches, and migraine; and its quality is that the pains are strange in twisting the neck, until the vein appears; then take the instrument called «fosseur», which has this form:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And put the point on the vein, and hold it with your hand or something else, and let the blood issue according to the quantity you see; then release the neck from the pain, and tie the vein until it is healed, and never again work on it with a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Therefore, it is not advisable that the flames be too hot or from the side, as the bone is close, and by chance, it may break the flames when they are thin.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The application of the second vein that is in the two armpits helps with the eyes, and the neck, and the jaw, and the ear in the oil, and for diseases of the face; and the quality of their application is such that the pain is relieved by twisting any part, as before; then the pain, and let the application be from the side, a little long of the flame, a little wide, because there is no harm.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flame is too thin, it might break; then correct the blood, as much as you have skill, and then bind it with cotton, and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The vein of the nose is good for ague, and for fevers, and for facial diseases such as migraines and redness that comes in the face, and always when it is old; and the quality of the vein is that the pains tighten their neck, then straighten their nose with your right hand, and take the thin flame long, and put it on the lip in the space between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well, and the blood will start to flow; and do not move too much forward, and bandage the wound according to your need, then leave it for one night, because it is quickly restored; and this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The salve of the second ginger helps to narrow the alainne, and at the beginning of the melting, and with many diseases, and with pustules, and with corrosions, and with herpes, and estiomenes; and the quality of the salve is that the pain moves away from one and the other, as we have said; and so the masters are above the chief of the pain, and the pain sits on one seat, then clean the wound with a long brush gently, then draw out the blood temperamentally, or as much as the matter requires; then do the other side in the other wound, then release the limb, and hold the wounds steadily, so that the pain does not entangle; and leave it at dawn, so that the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	of the health of the livers
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The health of the livers above the teeth helps in chewing food, and prevents tooth decay, and cracks in the lips, and dry throat and inside.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the quality of this health is to make the pain disappear before you, and hold its neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left, and they are known by the fact that they are black, and by the fact that around them there are small black veins: compare both, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt, compare the largest of each part, and do the same with the two veins that are above and below, for it is the same way.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	of the tongue's disorder
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The disorder of the veins that are dislocated from the tongue is helped after the disorder of the cephalic, and it is by tightening the throat, and diseases of the eye, and diseases of the mouth; and the quality of the healer is that the sickness stops between your hands before the sun, and the leaver the tongue, and looks from each side one black vein: thus it is healthy on both sides, and does not move too much, for beyond are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the neck that are commonly cured are cured in two ways: either by pinching with all the flame mirrored wide, or by a thin knife as if cutting trenches, and is called "aneth"; and they are wide and thin according to the width and tightness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the fire cautery is very famous, and is as wide as you see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it has a profession to open the veins that are deeply punctured with large blood clots and disturbed; and this is the form of the fire cautery.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	And it is more finely pointed, and is for cleaning the veins that are finely punctured, where there is fine blood clots.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The vein cleansing of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are outside the neck, and in the collarbone, and in the shoulder, and in the abdomen; and it is necessary for the cleaner to clean well, and to be careful not to cut the artery that is outside.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if he cuts the artery, and blood flows out, then it is necessary to cool it, as I have said; and do not prick the flame, but cut it as with a needle.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the abscess does not open clearly, then it is necessary to pierce and change another one; or you want any rain of it, or you squeeze in the vein instead of the arm: it opens clearly; and cut with a needle as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you know the vein of the sainie, then it is necessary to stretch the arm until you touch the vein; then sign the vein with a needle, and then bind the arm, and cut the vein with a needle; and beware that you do not pierce the artery when you see the vein swell, for it is the artery: avoid it then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it protruding high as the urine of a child, and the stain is red and thin, it is from an artery: hurry then, and put your hand longwise, then remove your hand without stopping, which has happened many times; hold the arm still, and let the hairs not move until it is healed; and be afraid, and do not move it until it is safe.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the wound is not stopped, and it bleeds, and the medicine is not present, then cut the artery if it opens, for the head of the blood will retreat; and stop the wound.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And take a splinter of figwood, and grind it, and take one half and lay it across the other side; if it does not stain, it is good; if it does, then cure it as we have said, with powders that stop bleeding; and the stops do not last in many positions for the small wound of the sore, and the position of the little arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The cleaning of the vein in the middle helps it treat blood from the top and the body, because it is composed of basilica and cephalic, as we have said; and the cleaner should wash all the nerves that are outside, and if he does not do so too much, and he finds the nerve, and he inflates it and the wound is healed, and perhaps it cannot be healed; and this nerve opens often, and if it does not open in any man due to its subtlety, then you should clean the wound with the instrument anesthetic; and shield the nerve from your power.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if he has veins between the two nerves, make it long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The cephalic vein helps, as it draws blood from the head, and helps with the eyes; and it is necessary to bleed in pinching the olive oil or myrtle leaf, for it is the safest of all veins, because it has no nerve or artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	However, it is necessary to seek the lighter vein, and do not harm anything if you have to do it the first time, and start again; and by chance, some people's veins swell, but it does not matter the first time.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of health is according to your thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you must know about health is that health is maintained only to maintain health and to prevent diseases from coming; and it should be done in one of the three ways that are either costly: namely, cephalic, fasting, and basilic; and if you must heal at the beginning of spring, autumn, and winter after the sign of repletion appears; and if you must heal on the first day or third, after two hours or three days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The healing that is administered to diseases has no determined time, but rather depends on the need of the day or night, in every hour and all ten; and it does not necessarily heal children under fourteen years, nor a pregnant woman except during the first four months after conception.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	They should not be treated by a young doctor who has passed 60 years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	When one wishes to be healed in any way whatsoever, it is necessary that they first cleanse the intestines of a light clyster if they have much feces retained, so that the veins do not draw harmful superfluities into the principal members; and they should not be healed by one who is too healthy from meats, or who is pale, to such an extent that they are hydropathic; and if one wishes to be healed after a colic attack, vomiting, diarrhea, and abdominal pain, and frequently traveling, nursing, and fasting, and all the virtues, or by some means of the arm or body; then subtly draw out the humors, if they are not too thick, by foods and drinks and medicines, if you have them; then bathe or wash, if nothing prevents, to subtilize the blood, and heal from the vein during the third hour, as we have said; and guard against that day of work, and pain, and luxury, and similar things; and be linked and joined, and let the healer be higher than those who are healed, and let him rub his hand twice or three times, then gently move the joint above the middle, for when it is too stiff or weak, it cannot be corrected; then rub the healer's hand on the wound until the veins swell, and feel the pain; then moisten the healer's flame with a little old oil, then put his right hand on top of the wound of the hand where he wishes to heal, that the vein does not fail to strike.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that flee as quickly as strings to the barber, and some that are plain from their softness, so that when one puts above the flame, they withdraw from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus are those; and if it opens the vein, then the wound is too tight, because it is necessary that the barber be aware of these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens the first time, it is good; but if not, then restart a little from that place or above hastily, if the veins are not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the veins are swollen, and the pain spreads, leave it for an hour or two, and do not bind the arm: perhaps an abscess will come; do not enter water, then restart the lancing if it pleases him; and if the wound is small, or the stone is cut subtly and you doubt that there is as much blood as you saw, then apply the flame directly to that wound; and work a little hastily, as long as the veins are swollen; for this happens often, when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the joint swells, do not start again with the same bandage, and put some oil on it, because it reduces the flow of blood in this joint, and it is beneficial for this joint like oil; and thus administer the oil in each bandage that you bandage the wounds, to stop the flow of blood; and the same thing applies to triangular and oblong bandages, when you put them on the joint; and gently apply the bandage as it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if there come some large abscesses that often occur, exactly when the opening of the wound is small, you must hurry and put on the limb a soft sponge soaked in hot water and a little linen cloth, and hold it for an hour; and it is necessary to do this after the flow of blood from the wound, and if it remains on the limb for several days without any sign of blackness or greenish color, then you must not remove it; and if you see anything of aloes or of myrrh mixed in some juice of calamint, myrtle, or similar thing.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often has an abscess and appearance of the saint's basilica: place your hand on it, and if you press the limb too much by the pressure of the hand, then that appearance is bad.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore do not place anything on it that we have said, for by chance you may cut the artery; but apply a dry plaster to harden the limb, then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And apply each bloodletting according to the amount of its virtue and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it flow until it turns red; and if you see it thick, let it flow until it becomes thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is appropriate for one who is plump and strong, and has the task of extracting arrows, to make a larger wound, and let the flames be wide; and for one who is weak, do the opposite, and let them rest often and little, and let the wound be sown by cutting across, not by pinching; and this method of stitching is safe from the discharge of poison and the compression of nerves, and is better than stitching long or wide.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for one whose body is weak at the time of stitching, it is appropriate to give them bread moistened in juice of green pomegranates; if they are hot-blooded, take out the arrow three or four times; and if they are cold-blooded, change the bread moistened in honey syrup or aromatic honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and strong-smelling syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	If he pounds the wound after much bleeding, then it is necessary to give him a broth of bone and an aromatic syrup, and use other things that we have mentioned in the division or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of blood.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to lance another arm, and bleed again, then it is necessary, when he is weakened by much bleeding, that he bleeds a little and little, according to the quantity of its continuous virtue.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And if he wants to lance another arm after the first bleeding, and he has strong pain, then he bleeds seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And those who wish to heal on the other side, they must heal in the second hour or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For it has much blood within the body which is already heated, and causes fever; so it must draw out a great quantity, and widen the vein until it cuts into the flesh; then one must restore all the conditions of healing, and place one's hand upon the pulse when it begins to heal, that the patient does not die in the absence of pulse, and this has often happened, when the healer is negligent; and it does not matter if you see the arm begin to swell, and draw out blood the second time, and the vein is closed, that you press firmly upon; but if it is curved, extend the arm vigorously, for this would be bad; but let it remain as it heals the second time; or you are not at the tip of the flame, until the blood that is frozen in the vein has been drawn out, and put a little piece of cloth in boiling water, and press upon it firmly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	If the wound is open, leave it and do not press on it until the abscess is calmed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	If it is necessary to draw blood again the second time, if the healthy vein is in the same limb, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is healthy because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	The method of vein puncture is that the hairs on the hand are burned with hot, sharp instruments until they turn red; then it is gently moved so that the vein appears well, then pricked from the side, not too wide or long; and the punctures should be wide, and the vein should be pricked close to the joint of the hand, and if it cannot be done, leave the hand in hot water, and let the blood flow out into the hot water until you have enough; and if it is in the arm, do not repeat the puncture in hot water, because it will cause more harm than good; and the vein puncture of this vein is safer than all other veins, as there are no arteries or nerves.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The salve of the hand from the right side is good for all diseases of the liver, and it is thus: strain the hand, and boil in hot water until the vein is emptied, if one sees it; and if the salve is against, and if you apply it with everything together, it does not hurt anything; and do not move too much immediately, for the nerves are all denuded of flesh, and then put the hand in hot water, if it is not frozen in the wound, and it cannot come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the arrow as much as is necessary, put oil and thread on the wound to sew quickly, and thus do for each one.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The left hand sweat is valuable for the disease of the mouse, and do everything as I have told you to the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The sweat of the sophene is valuable for all diseases that are not in the body, such as marsh fevers, retention of flushes, and diseases of the gout, and the joints and legs of old age, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the quality of its sweat is that the diseases are driven out in high heat, and rubbed on the vein until it perishes, and tied above the joint; and the vein is at the knee, and from above the knee, they go very much to the gout; therefore, sweat is more valuable at the knee, or at the joint, than it is.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you are healthy above the knee, and there are nerves that are dislocated, and the healthy one crosses as in knitting; and let the flames be close.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if it cannot issue from the knee, reset the knee in a high position, and let the vein drain well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the healthy one needs to be done first, then start the second one a little higher, because the veins are salty; do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and so make the other knee equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The vein of the sciatic nerve is at the knee of the thigh, and its healthy one is equal to the pain of the hip, when it is for an arrow.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the quality of its saintliness is such that the hairs between or in bathing, and is strange above the ankle four times twisted, because otherwise it does not open the vein; and if it opens, then heal it in all ways that you can, and crosswise; and it is better that you cover it, for the legs are sound, and it is very often reopened by hand.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not straighten it, then it heals none of those who open or close the small pore, and towards the little finger, and warns against the nerves; and correct as much blood as you see, and then release the ligament, and put it on cotton and hold it steady; it is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	of wounds of suction
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Suction wounds are made of horns, or of iron, or of glass; and ventosation is done in two ways: either by puncturing and drawing blood, or without puncturing.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this suction without puncturing is done in two ways: either all at once or without heat; and suction that is done by puncturing and drawing blood is done in twelve places on the body, of which one is completely on the top of the head; and the others are under the collarbone; and the other two are on the sides of the collarbone; and the suction outside the mouth; and the suction on the shoulders; and the suction on the heels; and the suction on the knees; and the suction on the ankles; and the suction does not treat blood, except for small veins that are scattered in the body, and therefore does not weaken anyone, as is done with a bleeding wound; and it should not be administered, neither at all heat nor without heat, in any disease that comes from repletion, until the whole body is drained.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if necessity of illnesses requires venesection, or by custom, let us perform it every hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in each season; for there are some who, when they have need of venesection, have heavy chests; and some who feel repletion and heaviness in their face, and in their head, and in their neck; and some who feel a drop of blood in their mouth, and extend their tongue, and suck blood; and there are some who dream, and see through blood and nails and death and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially when it is during the month, we command them to vomit after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The sweating of the head helps to relieve the pain of the head … that comes from them, and it should only be done after the evacuation of all the body; and this vomiting is in the place of the sweating of the cephalic, and it should not be used by those who are of cold complexion, or who have diarrhea, because this does much harm; and for this reason it should not be used by those who are guards, or who have head colds.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who often become faint, should have the cupping glass placed a little lower due to the uncertainty of fainting.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The cupping glass is placed on the neck instead of the chest and back, and it is good for narrowing the arteries, and piercing the main channel, and to all, and for replenishment; and it should not be held too tightly, as it may cause fainting or stomach pain and heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The cupping glass on the two ribs of the neck is good for headaches, and obtundedness, and dizziness, and choking, and pain at the roots of the teeth, and it is in place of the chest treatment; and it should be commanded to the sick person to press his hand when placing it, that he does not compress the artery, and does not cause blood to flow.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	Breathing through the nose is beneficial for mouth diseases, and decay of teeth, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the place of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	Breathing through the shoulders is beneficial for diseases that come from heat and filling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	Breathing through the elbows is as beneficial as three veins of the arm, for it draws blood from these large veins; and commands the healer that he does not prick too much in front, for the inside is without flesh, and knows how to draw out nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The suction cup that is on the back should be used for emoroidal diseases from the foundation, and for diseases that are out of place, and it should be a large, metal suction cup that can properly draw; and perhaps, if it is too thin, it will break; and then great wounds are made.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The leg suction cups should be used openly, for they draw blood from all over the body, and are good for old pains of the rain, and of the marsh, and of the bladder, and remove the flowers; and they are in the place of the two knees, and everywhere they weaken the body after long use, and cause pain in many positions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The way to apply the vacuum is that you first apply it empty and quickly suck, then press hard and move evenly, and do not stop doing this until you see the limb red and swollen, and open the vein; then stop, and replace the vacuums, and take care of the wounds, for there are some who have bad blood and clear pores: it is necessary to strike once only, and it is necessary to make wide wounds, and a few deep ones; and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the wound is large, it is necessary to strike twice: the first time to thinly cut through the thick blood vessel.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the joint is very out of place, it must be struck a third time; and when we want to pull out the arrow slowly and slowly, we should only strike once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we want much blood, we should often strike; and if the joint is not out of place, we should strike in front, and the end should be that the cut should pierce deeply, and it is suitable for those who have thick skin and are tough, and who have sharp nails, that you use the points of oil-soaked vacuums: if it is in summer, with violet oil or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil; and if it is in winter, with pennyroyal, lily, camomile, or other similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is large and cold, take oil of tamarisk, or balm, or aniseed oil, and similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if that person to whom one wants to apply a wide and loose bandage, then one should not put any oil on it, but it should be washed after the ventilation of hot rose water, or cold rose water, or marjoram water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or similar things.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have much moisture, if they rise with ash water, or rose water, or sumac water, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	Those who have excessive superfluities rise from old wine, or vinegar of soot, or decoction of anise or chamomile, or other similar things; and should not be made to sweat too much before the bath, nor in the bath, but after the bath for one hour or two; and should not sleep immediately after pustulation, and it is good that they warm themselves, when they should be pustulated and when they are pustulated.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And if those who are sweated are feverish, and if they are not too agitated and inflamed; then it is good that they take cold things, such as large green apples and endives and leeks at the sauce, and similar things; and they should drink milk of almonds, and char of Castile, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And those who have a cold constitution should take honey syrup, and aromatic wine between old and new, and a little juice, and little pinch of pepper and small birds; and the day they are about to vomit, they should drink more than usual; and it is appropriate to give some men once triphala or muscat before vomiting, or after, to strengthen the main members; and the subtle ones should not drink it, but only those who are chaste.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The suction cups that are placed on the body to cause pain are those that are placed on the liver, and in the groin, and in the gout, and on the stomach and the buttocks and the legs and the waist, because these members do not suffer much from pain on the outside, and no one does it except to draw blood from member to member, as we place suction cups on the breasts when the newborn is born; to remove the viscosity that is in the member, as we place suction cups on the stomach and on the buttocks to soften the member; and remove the pain, when there is an abscess or a stone, if by its attractive power it happens to remove the abscess, or dislodge the stone from its place; and thus it is done as long as one places it on the liver and in the groin when there is retained viscosity, and these suction cups are administered empty for drainage only; and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes with a hot iron, if there is high fever, and in such a way that one fills the suction cup with hot water, or with water where herbs have been cooked.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the suction applied by fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And it should be two inches wide and half a palm in length, and should have a small hole in the middle, as to put an needle, and it should be of tin or lead before it is put on the limb so that it does not burn the hair when placed on the limb; and it should have a cross-shaped rod of tin or iron in the middle to place a cotton pad, and they should be large and small according to the diseases and age of those who take them; for the suctions of children are different from those of adults, and thin ones from fat ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And one should thus place this suction cup on the limb: take the wax or liniment, and put it inside the suction cup at the cross of the stick that is inside the suction cup, so that the light is at the bottom of the suction cup that it does not burn the hair; and then put it on the limb, and one should be above the punctures that we have said, so that when one wants, if the vapor goes, and one removes the suction cup; and take the liniment as before, and start again often, if you have need.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	Therefore, in the suction cup that is administered in the disease of pleurisy, at all acute, there is no stick or puncture, and it is not administered except when it is full of acute, and it is placed on the limb alone; and this is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Sansues are not applied except in members where one cannot place suction for their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar things; and in those remove the clothing, such as two or nose, and others similar; and the quality of the use is that when you trueve sansues that are in fresh waters without pressure, take them; and put them in fresh water, until they are familiar, and have nothing in their bellies; and then cleanse with blood and suction, then rub the member until it is red, and put on the sansues; and when they are plain, and dry, if it is a place where one can place suction, place it, for this is very good afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If not, first lift the limb from below, and then from above, very well, and then wipe it; and if the wound is too large after the course of the sinews, then moisten a linen cloth with cold water, and place it on top, until the wound is stopped up; and if the wound multiplies, then place vitriol or galls on it, or similar things, until it is stopped up; or you put half of pounded cloves on the wound, and leave them on until they dry on the limb, which will stop it now; and if you have more trouble, take other sinews.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the worms do not want to take, rub the flesh of blood fresh, or you have stuck a needle so that the worms in it, and then put them on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will fall; and when you see that they are dying, powder with a little aloe and beaten silk, or ash, if they will now cherish.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it restores fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Listen, dear child, that the folly of men has often caused this chapter to be lost, neither have they seen any of the old books nor have they read them; and for this reason the science is unknown in our land, for I found none good; and I know nothing, except by the science of the old books, which I have studied so much that I have treated it, and by experiment, and by the custom of my life; and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained, and I have abbreviated it at the end, and I have shown clearly the forms of the instruments that will be used, as I have done in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, it is necessary that we say or prologue of this book the summaries of the language and the chapters where the wise place their understanding, and dwell on the truth, so that those who are experienced may find and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twist or wound comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to clean the wound on both sides, if nothing prevents, such as weakness of body, or children, or old people; or if their condition is not very cold, or too hot; and change cold damps, and chicken broth and goosebroth, and do not drink wine, and change no heavy foods, and do not fill oneself too much with food that fills the veins with blood, until you have no doubt of an abscess, or of spreading of matter to the member; if the wound returns to its former government as it has used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that the wound be cleaned with a thick bread dough, or with viscosity, as cooked wheat, and rice, and tests, and pie, and chicken pancakes, and eggs, and fish, and thick wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For the cleaning process may cause pain and more quickly break the fracture.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that bones broken in the old and infirm cannot be properly mended or soldered according to their nature due to the age of the members, nor those who are too tender, such as the bones of small children; but rather, put them above the broken bone with large strong ones that support and join the member together, as much as it can enforce, until it enforces as it was before; and do not leave any part of its work, and for this reason, it is necessary to clean with thick foods, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And there are various ways to break bones in many different manners.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the breaking of the shoulder is different from the breaking of the arm or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all the ways of breaking.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is breaking that goes like an arrow, and another in soaking, like the tip of a quill for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is breaking with a wound, and breaking all in a small cut.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And each manner has its own mechanism, and its proper tool in the restoration, according to what the memory comes in its place; and the breaking of the bone is known by the bone being twisted, and open well by defense, and it is to the pressing of the hand; and when there is no twisting nor to the touch, and the pains are not great, if there is no breaking; but it can have twisting, or cut, or small breaking.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	You should not move it by hand, but apply the remedies that come after, and then gently hold it now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And if the fracture is in the arm, and the two parts are disjointed, you should now set them evenly, as soon as pus comes out; and if pus hardens and comes, do not let any pus remain until the pus is calmed; then put it evenly to the muscles that you can lightly and safely move, and if the restoration of this is lighter than the restoration of that where there are pieces, then hold it as it should be afterward.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if it is in a broken bone, if it is of two parts, whether by hand or foot, or to your hand if it is small members, or to two strings, or to one string and to your hand; and put the member according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken member are separated, you should gradually add them back in their places with care that through your work no further injury or pain comes; and well set the two ends of the bone according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel it with your hand if it seems to you that it is not quite right: if it feels well, and do not strain it too much, nor press as those who bring it through their work with an abscess and contraction of the member, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the member is in place, well punish the bad pain that it does not move, whether awake or sleeping, turning or in any other way; and keep well that the member is so secure that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when it feels no pain, it is not yet in place, and you should put it in the right position so that it feels no pain; and guard that it is put correctly, for twisting does not come when it is restored; and the quality of the member broken is according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	The broken members are different in size, greatness, and shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For there are small members, such as arms and legs and similar ones: if they are thin, cover them with soft linen cloths; and those that are thick, such as ribs and legs: if they are thick, cover them with a wide and strong cloth, for the wide cloths embrace the whole member, and strain it evenly from all parts, so that there is no gap; then wrap light bandages around it, three or four times according to the length of the member, and hold your hand a little on each side of the cloth, then go above the fracture and strain it less, than the fracture slowly remove the fracture; then soften the cloth little by little, until you grasp a large part of the sound flesh, then take another cloth and return around the broken bone; then return to the part away from the fracture, and strain it evenly, neither too hard nor too painfully, as we have said in the first chapter above; then place between the cloths a linen or cloth bandage, as much as they are even, then tie all from above with a bandage, and put your well-made bandages on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is an abscess or swelling, put something soothing on the abscess and what removes the swelling, and leave it like this for some time; then strain it through these filters, and be of half a wide cloth safely, or from which the clips are made, or from palm branches, and be according to this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	But it is necessary that the filter that one puts over the wound be slightly larger and wider than the others; and also as long as the limb of smallness or greatness requires; then strain through these filters just as you did in the first layer, then tie up above a thread evenly, as in the first layer over the broken part; the tighter it is, the less; and it should be that the threads are medium, neither too thick nor too thin, and of fine linen; for if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the works of those who make their own cords of linen thread twisted, and this is great error, because the bandage cannot be equal if it is too delicate, and it should only have a little more than two spaces between each filter.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the hairs are torn out by the pricks of the needles after they have been sterilized, put some ointment or lint on them so that they do not become infected.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the splinter, and the stitches are broken, I will tell you the treatment afterwards.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And do not strain all the broken limbs with needles on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	Because when the limbs are large, you should not put needles in them for at least five or seven days, depending on your risk of abscess; and here is the method of ancient plasters to restore fracture, dislocation, and torsion: take some flour that is kept in a bag next to the mill, and mix it with an abundance of water, and make this paste, not too thin or too thick, and apply it, and this is the common method of the plaster restoring fracture at many positions, and especially for women and small children, because it is not too hard or too soft.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another method of plaster for healing fractures, dislocations, and twists: take alabaster, ladani, enule, and asafetida, each X amount; myrrh and aloes, each V amount; alechil VIII amount; and make a powder, mix it with honey; if the patient's constitution is hot, use this plaster, as it is of good composition, and it quickly heals broken bones, and is beneficial to many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another method of plaster for twists: take mugat and vismalve, each X amount; myrrh and aloes, each VIII amount; bolic armenic VI amount; grind it well and mix it with vinegar or honey, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another method to treat joints and bones that are dislocated or broken, to relieve pain, and to use the bone and the fracture: take a new bandage, dip it in hot oil, and place it on the affected area.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	These bandages do not heal, but they are good for relieving abscesses and properly treating pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method to treat broken bones that heals: take dried fig leaves and earth petrified wood, grind them together, and make a bandage.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another method to treat the healing of bone fractures and to alleviate the remaining pain from the abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take the root of valerian, chamomile flowers, violet flowers, flour of each one in equal parts; and grind, and make into a paste with wine, and if the limb is cold, apply the paste with moist coriander juice or vinegar.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another way to treat more than the first, when an abscess is resistant to the restoration of the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take the roots of valerian and linseed, balm, melilot, and violet flowers and chamomile, of each one in equal parts; and grind, and make into a paste with salty water, sweet water, or wine, depending on the temperature of the limb and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates said in his book that one should not put on a broken limb that which is made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and he said that it should be between two things, neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems that Galen said that one should put on a broken limb to restore it, dry things slightly warm, such as myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to treat injury and pain: take the marrow and hooves of men who have died, or feathers of owls, and vinegar, and linen evenly, and grind them, and make a plaster and apply it to the wound.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then loosen the bandage a little afterwards, and be careful if the hairs do not feel any pain, nor have moved the bones of the limb; then do not loosen the bandage by hand again. And if pain comes to the limb, or itching, without rest or inflammation, then hurry, and loosen the bandage, and take a light cloth, and moist sponge from sea water, and plunge in hot, and raise the limb, until the itching ceases, and soothe the pain; then let the member rest for an hour, then put on dry linen, moistened with hot oil or rosewater, and bind it with a nut, until you are sure of no abscess forming; and relieve the inflammation of the limb, and soothe the pain, then begin the thin bandage again, and a little of the plaster, and do not strain it as tightly as before; and gradually as it becomes healthy.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	If you see that the abscess has pus and is red, swollen, and painful, and you have skill in applying poultices and bandages, if it restarts, as you did before, evenly.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	And if it does not come to the limb as we have said within three days or four or five or seven; and never leaves it for twenty days, as long as the breaker is aware, and approaches the joint above; then it should be restrained more than before, and it will increase its flesh, as I said before; and if you see that the limb becomes too dry, there cannot be any new growth; then apply hot water frequently, every hour, and loosen the bandage a little; by this method, then, the new growth is prevented in the limb, and it is healed quickly as they do with the foolish people, who restore the limb painfully: this is bad, and if it is a difficult case, and I see nothing else but the weakening and the correct work.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various breaking ways
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	Many breaking ways are, and diverse figures, and the causes are distinguished; for there are breaks that are made of percussion of sword, and the collar bone completely breaks the bone just below it which is outside the bone, as it does hunchback or broken; and for this reason this type of break is called «hunchback break».
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	Or the sword cuts the bone from above through the point, and this type of break is called «absolute break»; and it is the wound of these two breaks great or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is percussion embedded, or cut or of fall from rock, or of falling on stone, or similar.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if he has a fracture, which approaches the tendon that is outside the bone, or above the bone, and this wound is large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if the wound is set into the bone as delicately as a hair, and the fracture is small, and for this reason it is called "capillary" fracture; and if the wound is made by being struck by an arrow, or falling, or something similar, and the piece of the bone enters below, and the threads are like those of a cauldron when they are pierced with a fire.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And there are more who have or chief moist bones, such as the head of a child; and they have all these kinds of fractures where small pieces are displaced as these; and I will speak to you about them in their place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all kinds of fractures by the displacement above them, and by the inquiry with probes, and by the rottenness that is above.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The appearance of the hair is known because when one has exposed the bone, and one rubs it above, if there is an open fracture.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of the fracture, be careful of the bad accident, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, and loss of understanding, and extension, and paleness, and fever ague, and the eyes issuing forth and reddening, and other similar things in many dispositions, it cannot be cured without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see any visible injury, and you hope for recovery, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the broken bone comes first to you, and it is in the leg, then you should remove the bone before the fourteenth day at the most that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in the arm, then you should remove the bone before the seventh day, provided that the skin around the bone is not rotten, and the injuries we have mentioned occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the fractured bone comes close to the skin that covers the skull, then you should remove the damaged part as follows: and you should press the head of the painful wound, and uncover the bone in all ways that you can, and above the shape of the wound more softly than you can, and if blood comes out when removing the bone, or an abscess forms, help it according to what is necessary, and it is that you fill the wound with moistened linen cloths in rose oil; and let the wound rest until the abscess is soothed, and make sure that blood does not come out; then begin around the bone to remove, and it is done according to two methods of work: one method is that you cut tightly in front, and this is the form.
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	Then use another larger incision than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And in the second manner, you should have various incisions of different sizes, some narrow and others wide, and they should be sharp and made of iron; and work lightly, so as not to wound the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And if the tooth is very hard and outside, it is necessary that you perforate around it, as well as administering incisions with trephines, not piercing beyond the test bone, and it should have above the point a margin or circle, which does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone; and you should have several of them, so that each time comes in its place on the surface of the bone, so that you have trephines for all tests; and this is the form of the three ways of trephining:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	To perforate the bone around the broken one is that you put a sharp object on the bone, and turn to your right until you know that the bone is perforated; then remove the sharp object in another part slightly afterwards, and so do all around, then cover the incisions the space of the bone between the teeth, and do it more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you remove the bone to your hand, or to any of the tools that you have such as forceps, pliers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the tongue.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have perforated and treated the bone, it is advisable to close the opening of the bone to all other tools resembling an incisor, but it must be more slender and more subtle than the other incisor; and if nothing remains of the small bones, or scales, then gently remove them with the tools; then treat the wound with tents and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other way of working is as the Galians say, which is more safe; and it is very good, and that is their word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is first necessary that you uncover a part of the bone where the fracture is open, so that when you have uncovered that part, then remove the lens-shaped piece from the shape of this incision, because of which:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one part, and the broken piece is in two parts, so that the cutter is towards the bone; then use a small hammer on top, so that you lightly tap the bone all around, and be careful of the thread that is outside; if it is against the bone, then lightly tap the bone, because one taps the bone too hard, and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone's fracture does not pierce through the cloth, and the bone is crushed only from above, and there are small pieces, it is necessary to remove those roughnesses, and to scrape off the scales with the subtle razor that you should have various quantities of, in order to treat each limb as conveniently as possible, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you must use large razors first, and then more subtle ones, and do not stop doing this until it is well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other hair-cutting and fracture subtle instruments, it is necessary to treat according to its advantage; and this is a matter that is not immediately apparent to him who has put his study in this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	If the wound is exposed, it is necessary to apply a linen cloth according to the size of the wound, moisten it with rose oil, and place it over the wound; then take another cloth doubled in two or three, moisten it with wine and rose oil, and place it over the first cloth; do this more gently than you can, so as not to aggravate the wound, then administer by pouring lentil powder, flour of wheat, frankincense powder, aristolochia, and similar things; make a powder from these things and place it over the wound, and administer liquid medicines without causing pain; keep the wound clean, do not leave any tinder, because when tinder gathers on the brain's surface, it causes the brain to rot and suffer great harm; for when something sharp is placed over the wound, it does not heal.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take care then, for if no accidents come to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful with doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there is no other remedy than the one you have placed on, which has virtue, then you must take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and one cloth, and put it on the wound; then cure it with methods of cures that are appropriate, until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Be careful that the two parts of the bone above are never broken, or one by itself, because they are two bones; and that one is cartilaginous and does not break, unless it is bent or twisted, and then it heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	If one of the two parts is broken, you must bore a small hole or puncture into the nerve, and place the broken part inside your index finger, and in the palm by default, until the nerve regains its natural shape; do this lightly, and guard that the pain does not feel through your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the upper part of the nerve, and cannot reach the finger, then you must place it at the top of a small bone.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the break is in both parts, then make another one, and hurry to restore the first joint, if you can; if not, after the seventh or eighth day, when the swelling of the wound is calmed, then bore a hole at the top of the nerve with linen cloth, if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	When you turn the other way, if the fracture is there; and if the tents are so large that they fill the nostrils.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And they said no one should clean the tents in the morning, and every day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	It does not seem to me that this is good, but they should be cleaned with a mixture of honey and powdered milk; then leave the tent until the bones are healed, and the cartilages hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And never use goose feathers in place of tents, and if there is a soft cloth around, and if the fracture is present, and blows the bad air away; then do what you see.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	If an abscess comes to the nose while you are working, put cotton or a piece of bread soaked in rose oil or a drop of ichthyol on it.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If an abscess does not come to the nose, put a paste made of mustard flour and incense powder mixed with egg yolk on it, then place light cloths over it and do not bind it tightly; if the broken piece of the nose is small and in many pieces, use suitable instruments to remove them, then cut away the wound, and care for other injured parts as appropriate, and apply suitable ointments and remedies as needed; and if there is no wound inside the nose, treat it with tents and place cotton in it until it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	of the fracture of the jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is fractured without any wound, and the fracture is not completely separated, and it is not broken into two pieces, but rather cracked inside, if one knows this clearly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the fracture is on the right side, then you should press your index finger in the mouth of the patient; and if the fracture is on the left side, then press your index finger with your right hand, and gently press the fracture inside, and hold it with the other hand by default, and make it even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the jaw is in two pieces, it is necessary that you administer extension of two parts until they are even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if the movement of the teeth avails, or breaks, then strain one thread of gold or silver or silk, then place it over the broken jawbone, and place a double cloth on top; and place on the cloth a great well-made stick, or a piece of leather even in length and width according to the jaw, and tie it to the muzzle so that you can, and command the patient to rest, and feed him light meals.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	If you see that the figure changes, let the patient rest for a day, and then put it back in place; and apply an ointment on top, of flour from the mill with abundance of egg or flour of mustard, after you have removed the crust; and apply the ointment again, and if the disposition does not change, let it be as long as it becomes healthy; often it becomes healthy in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if an abscess comes to the head, follow what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a break and wound together, cover the unbroken piece of the bone that is healed; and subtly from the healing apply it with convenient instruments.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	If the wound is narrow, then expand it as needed by fire.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces and there is no longer any delay, if the wound is wide, put on top of it some suitable plasters, to apply charcoal, until it is healed.
de la forcele	from the strength
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The shoulder blade is broken several times in front and behind, and the fracture occurs in three ways: either it is broken and displaced into two, and there are pieces, and it is the least heavy to restore; or there is a fracture with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And when the fracture is on the side of the wound, you should have two assistants, one to hold the injured part where the bone is broken; and the other to extend the collar towards the affected part; then set the fracture with your hands, so that it forms as it should, and there is no appearance or movement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend further, place a round, rounded piece of cloth or linen, as large as needed, under the shoulder bone; and extend and lift the broken bone, holding the sphere in your hand, so that you can set the fracture as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	If you cannot pull the shoulder out of its socket by force, because it comes out in front, then it is necessary to let the hairs lie evenly on their own, and place the shoulder bone on the shoulder blade, and push the ministers the shoulder down, until the bones of the shoulder are raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	Then bring the fracture to your own, and if the fragments are broken, it is necessary to saw them; and carefully remove the pieces, and if the bones cannot be joined for any reason, then use one of the instruments you have; but put the tool away from the shoulder to prevent infection.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	It resembles a spoon, and is not straight, and should be as wide as it needs to be, according to the size of the bone and the skill of the workman; and have two prongs, like this, and one wide and the other narrow, like the edge of the wound that you made when you treated the bones; and when you are sure of an abscess, if you cut the wound, and if the edge is small, or you doubt an abscess, use the wound with cloths and tents, according to its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if an abscess comes, if you moisten the cloth with rose oil and vinegar and wine, and put it on.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	For the fracture of bone, whether it is near the skin or deep inside, you should place a plaster of powder from the mill and some flour on top of the bone, and put light bandages over it, and place a sphere outside the joint if you have skill; then take a very large bandage of about a palm's width, and double the cloth over the bandage and the plaster; then take a thin strip of cloth about three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the larger bandage, so that the head of the larger bandage hangs down; place the thin strip on the fracture, and roll the larger bandage up from the collarbone to the shoulder, and remove the sphere outside the joint, and remove the badly aligned part; then align each part, and if you see that the patient tolerates the thin strip evenly, and clearly see that the thin strip does not move over the broken bone, reward every day, and when the limb is free of pain, restrain it; place the badly aligned part on its back, and put a small piece of cloth outside the joint as a support to lift the fracture up; align the break by aligning the shoulder, or tie the arm to the collarbone, and do not move it unless there is a bad accident in the next 20 days; then begin again with the plaster if you see that it is necessary, and tighten and leave it until it is healed; it is healed in about 28 days, and less for some people.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the shoulder fracture
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	There are few cases where the shoulder breaks or moves out of place, and it is not fixed except by touch; if the splint according to the figure of the fracture, and the shoulder is put back in its natural form, in all ways that you can; then put on the bone powder from the mill with abundant water, and light dressings, and put a double cloth; then put on a wide and delicate splint, a little wider than the shoulder, and if the splint is not in any part of the shoulder, use the hair of the bandage so that the splint is evenly; and then tighten it all with a strong bend, so that the splint does not move from its place, and watch it every day; and every time it breaks, tighten again, and if it is far from its place, and ease the pain on its side; and the shoulder is restored in 20 days or 25. And when these numbers are completed, remove it, and be careful, for this is not bone that is put back firmly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone is torn off before, and not removed from the wound, then cut through it, and the bone, and do what we have said in the breaking of the finger to relieve an abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	of the breaking of the pinky
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The little finger is never broken in the middle, but it often breaks at the end.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, it declines outwards, and the patient feels great pain, and the finger is crooked, and everything, and perhaps blood flows, and the bones are exposed in the broken bone, and the smell is bad.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that the hairs are arranged evenly on top of their backs, and the handkerchief is placed between the shoulder blades, then press the shoulder blades, and gather the ribs of the two ribcages in your hands, and subtly put them in place in all the ways you can, until the figure of the bone is as it should be; then place bandages and poultices above the thin bone of salt, or another light one, and wrap it in a cloth, and tie it to the broken bone so it does not move; and return the limb gently to the back, and gradually tighten it, and reward every hour with the book, and if it moves, tighten it; and if it is necessary to release it for corrosion or for itching that comes to the skin, or pain or abscess, then hurry and release it, and replace the bandage, and address what has come from methods of treatment; then reapply the bandage, and tighten it until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	of rib fractures
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	The fracturer of the ribs comes only from heavy blows to the chest and the back, and the head inside, and they do not come unless because they are sharp; and one feels it well at the inquiry as we have seen.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the treatment is that you set the fracture as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	Then apply the poultice, and the bandage of a splint, if you have skill in that.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the fracture of the ribs is declining inward, it feels great pain and sharpness, like pleurisy, because the bones do not pierce the skin; and they must be lanced, and everything must be drained of much blood, and this is a grievous sickness, and the ancients have put much effort into it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if among those who say that it is necessary to administer foods that swell the stomach, to push the rib outwards.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We should not do this, unless there is an abscess present.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come, then the healthy one.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they said that none of us should put suction on the limb, for it is good for draining, and this seems to be reasonable; however, there is doubt as to whether the suction will draw the excess from the limb due to its weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they said that none of us should cover the limb with soft cloth in hot oil, and then put tents between the ribs to keep the lung even inside, then treat the care of pleurisy, food and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the pain is great that they cannot bear it through the bone that does not cover it, and there is doubt, then you must cut across the broken rib on the side, and you must place an instrument to keep the wound open; and then you must saw the bone, and gently pull it out, and then stitch the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and treat them with ointments, until they are healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes on the skin, then place moist cloths soaked in rose oil on it; and treat it while the skin is healing from the abscess, and let it lie down beside it where it should be, until it is healed.
de la brisure dou col	of the broken neck bone
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	No time comes when the breaker breaks the neck bones, and often it does not rain; and so on the backbone.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to anyone, and you want to know whether it will be healed or not, if you see his hands softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move or extend them, and when you touch them with a needle, they do not feel.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	It is said that it is deadly in many positions, and if they move and feel well when held and not, then it is said that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the pains are healed, if one puts on care.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if a similar thing comes to the spine in the back, and you know whether it is healthy or not, if you notice if the feet are soft, and if the accidents that are in their hands, and above the back suddenly ventilates and egests without volition; and when it is laid on its belly, if it suddenly egests without volition.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when it is laid on its back and it wants to sit up, it cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Know that it is fatal: do not attempt to treat it.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come to it, then the thing is less serious.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the care is that you reward if there is an abscess open, to put on the back rose oil or chicken fat, as long as it is calmed; then put on one of the healing plasters and drying, and tie with a bandage, and command the pain to rest; and do not sleep on that part where it hurts, as long as it is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is dry, it is necessary to cover with the cloth; then remove the bone, then assemble the two flaps of the wound, if it is large, at a seam, then cure the ointment applying char, as long as it is healed; and if the bone is broken, which is called the «broken bone», if you have a pouch in your right hand, and put it even on the other hand to your power, then put the plaster and the bandage above, if you have the skill; then strain, and if there is dry bone, do it again, and remove, and cure the wound as long as it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the ribs of the back
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	Very rarely does the backbone of the ribs break, and if it does, it is not often due to a slight movement of the neck; and making it long, and declining towards the spine, and coming to the bone, it causes great pain, swelling, and inflammation where it is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is such that you extend your hand over it, as high as the fractured part; and scrape away the broken pieces and the bone shape; and if the fracture is only at the top, then align it until it is in its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long, or it declines towards the inside, then place the limb above its belly, until the restoration of this fracture is complete.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have placed it evenly, then place the plaster on top, then place a splint of wood or bone, and hold the fractured part so that it does not move; and apply the limb away from the sides, until the limb is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on their good side, or on their back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if an abscess occurs, do not touch it until the abscess is calm, and then apply what we have previously mentioned; and then return to the restoration, and hold it as it should be, if there is no bad accident; and this is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the breakage of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder joint is the area between the neck and the top of the shoulder, and if it is broken, one must restore it according to one of the two methods: one method is that you take a piece of bone with a single groove, in this form:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie the two pieces together, and raise them high, and saw through the misaligned part on the seat; then pour some broken bone over the broken arm, until it reaches the ease, and has a nail of bone in the middle, then raise any heavy object or the assistant extends it below; then put the splint together with the pieces, until the broken person returns as it should be.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is to place the dislocated joint on its natural place, and hold it with one's hand at its collarbone, then command two ministers that one ties what is above the broken part of their hands, and the others tie from all directions to everything, and extend each to their part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is too far, hold the ministers away from the broken part and above it, and extend each of them to their part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the broken part is near the top of the shoulder, then you should place one cord outside the acromion, and the other towards the back, away from the broken part; and similarly, if the broken part is towards the back, then you should place the rope lightly, without labor, until the broken part is even with the top of the shoulder and the back, then make it even, as it should be, and extend it, if necessary, so that it does not come out.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	If abscesses arise and come, if you do not restrain them within seven days, and put on them millet flour and rose oil, until the abscesses are calmed; then restrain, and the way of restraining is that you put the plaster on the swollen part, then bring the arm up to the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the chest; and put the bandage, and restrain on the shoulder, and on the arm, so that the arm is in its place, if nothing prevents it, or if the bone does not move.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	If you doubt that the bone does not move, use splints, and place a wider and stronger splint than the others above the fracture, and have two spaces between each splint, and let each splint be so large that it passes the fracture three fingers on each side; then strain against the splints, as I said at the beginning of this chapter, more strongly and less distantly.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the sitting of the splints and the straining, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the abscess is healed, let it be tied up for seven days, as we have said; then examine the wound every three days, that it does not become inflamed or infected, or that the discharges do not come to the limb because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If as directed, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such accidents occur, then only after three days or more, and the pain lies on his back, and his hands are on his stomach; and place the remedy in plain cloth equally, and look every hour of the day or night, that the figure of the member does not move, or that the ligaments are not softened; if as directed by the power of medicine, and give him the food that we have previously placed, in such a way that the food is at the first subtle; and when he begins to recover, it should be thick.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	It is customary that the shoulder and leg dislocations should be reset in forty days from all; and then one must apply and administer warm baths and remedies of ointments for the limb to recover.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the structure is ugly and deformed, it may take two months or more to reset.
de la brisure du bras	of the broken arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "humerus" and "radius", one of which is small and is that which forms the pocket; and the other is large, and is that which is outside, towards the little finger; perhaps the large humerus alone is broken, or the small one, and perhaps both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When small bones are broken, the restoration is light, and the healing; and when large bones are broken, the healing is poor, and more painful than when they are broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is only the small bones that are broken, then it is best to extend them slightly and align them evenly.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it is the large bones, then it is best to pull them more strongly; and extend them upwards over the cushion, and stain the pocket of the hand higher than the other fingers, and the small fingers lower than the others, and let the tendons cross over themselves, and the cushion in front of him higher, so that the tendons suffer no labor; then extend the assistants' arms to the part outside of his hand, or to the elbow, and other assistants above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	Then place the mirror evenly, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if it breaks into pieces, put each in its place, and if there is no piece that can be held by the hand, and you cannot restore it to its place, then do as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the broken one there is a wound, I have spoken of it in the chapter; take care of it.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if in the beginning of the restoration there are abscesses, then glue the cloth of cerate made of red oil and white wax, which is not too hard nor too soft; and bind the cloth subtly, until the abscesses are soothed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	Then remove the cast, and apply the plaster of flour from the mill with abundant oil, then place the splints, and make the splint of the broken bone wider than the others; and it should have six splints or more in various positions: whether the broken bone is in one of the bones, or in two; and it should be held higher than the broken bone than other parts, and always less distant, as I said at the beginning of this chapter; and let the cloths that are on the broken bone be soft and moist, and not too hard or sharp; and let the thread, by which it is tied, be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reward the member and the joint after some time.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any accident occurs to the member, such as itching that comes to the member, it is necessary that you raise the member in hot water, until those itching are soothed; and let the member not be too tightly rested.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then continue the reduction, and if the joint is broken and the bones are displaced, and similar things, if it addresses.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the tendons cannot come to the member, because it is too tight, it is necessary that you soften it a little, and let it rest for some time, until the tendons are corrected, and then reset.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things we have said come to harm, let it lie for 20 days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	Then apply heat to his neck, and let his neck be straight, and avoid movement and stretching, and sleep on his back; and in 30 or 35 days, or perhaps in 20 days, depending on the constitutions and complexions of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the broken hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Then apply heat to the back of the hand and avoid it having too many fractures, and it will only hurt once in a while.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	And when the bone of the hand is broken or painful, it is necessary that the pain be crossed and straightened in front of him equally; then put his hand on the extended palm, and extend the ministers to the broken bones, and place them evenly among the fingers, until they are well joined; and apply the plaster and bandages, if there are no abscesses, then place a splint according to the amount of the bone; and let it be wrapped in a linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the broken bone is in the paraded part around the belly of the plantar, then make a ball of cloth, and instruct the patient to wrap it around his broken foot; and then bandage it with a long strip of cloth, and let it be as wide as the palm of the hand, and bandage it as it should be.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the broken bone is in the dorsum, then it is necessary to place a splint above, and another below in the sole, so that the hand is open and straight, then bind it all around the hand, and stanch the wound between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fractured bone comes to any of our joints, such as the wrist, if it is out of place, put it back in place, and hold it with the palm, and see if you can lift the fractured bone without moving; and if the fracture is in other joints, such as the index or the others, put it back in place, and bind it with the sound joint that comes after; or you can tie them all together while holding them, which is better, or you can put a splint on top, as you would for a wrist; and take care in the restoration and positioning of abscesses, and attend to what comes next, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken ribs
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	The ribs of the ribcage are often broken, and one can see them when they turn in front and behind; and the restoration is as one lies on the side of the breaker, and the other away from it.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the hairs are cut off from his face, then each minister stretches their own line evenly; and this is when the break is brought to the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the break is close to the root of the ribcage, then one line should be on the side of the breaker, and the other lines away from it.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if it is near the glenohumeral joint, and then the ligaments above the glenohumeral joint are stretched, and the extension down; then place the hand on the bone equal to its two hands, as long as it is according to its natural shape, and then apply the plaster, and the bandage, and if there are no abscesses.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	If there are abscesses, let it rest and then return to your work and treatment; the bandage is made in this way.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary to wrap the broken bone twice or three times in a doubled-over bandage and let the excess remain, then bend the leg until the toes reach the root of the foot, and place a long thread between the calf and the leg below the glenohumeral joint, and bring the upper end of the thread above; then bend the broken bone again and place the bandage on top of it, then place a bandage over the bone of the leg; then fill the space between the leg and the calf with soft cloth to equalize the tension, then begin to bandage around three or four times above the break; and as you go higher than the break, and lessen the tension; then take two threads that you have placed between the leg and the calf, and three bandages that are above, then return to the top of the thread, until you reach below the knee; and if it does not move from its place, then let it remain, so that there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it is dislocated, if you pull it and direct it as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of the bone that you can grasp, then it should be set, if possible; and if not, then you must break the limb and remove the fragments; and the cure is as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And never break the neck in such a way that one puts these things on it, as in the dislocation of the arm; nevertheless, in such a restoration made, it does not cause great pain to the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And it is said that the neck is restored in a few days, or slightly more or less, according to the different constitutions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the groin path
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	There are few breaks in the groin path, but it often bleeds.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, it is only a small cut or puncture, and it has to all wounds, both inside and outside, and it feels very well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is done by putting together what is torn apart, as much as it can be; then put on the plaster, and if you have skill, place a round bandage, and hold it as it should be, then reward all the preparations that we have said in other breaks, such as abscess and similar; put to each accident what it needs, until it is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the broken leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	It is said that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is called "mustelz" on the right side, and the other is called "foscile"; and they are all as fragile as those in the arm, and for this reason the restoration is the same as that of the arm equally, and the work is complete. And if both bones are broken at once, then the leg returns to its normal state from all parts.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the small bones are broken, then it returns in front.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bone is broken, then it causes great pain and can be seen clearly; and it returns outwards.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Therefore, apply gentle traction, and make it even, and tie the fractures equally; but anyway, it is necessary to limit the breakage and the deformity, and there are many pieces, that the traction be less and lighter; and mend according to your virtue.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, take two strips of cloth that bind the leg on one side and the other, and be long enough to go from the knee down to the ankle; then wrap them around the leg above and below, and tie it in the middle as well, and at this point the leg will not bend to the right or left, and thus it is good; and no one administers the long cloth of the leg, and if it is made properly, and correctly place the leg to prevent movement, and properly do this in the break or where it is wounded; and move the leg every day to see if there is an abscess or other accident; if the cure until it is healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the fracture of bones due to a fall
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle, there is no fracture, but a bone due to a fall often does not break and has only minor damage, and there is never any serious injury in many positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there is a fracture of the bone due to a fall, and you see these bones sticking out above each other, if you put them back on the ground, as if they want to walk, then put your bone where the bones are raised, then press them so much that they return to their place; then apply the ointment and dress with a poultice of two fingers wide, then strap the bone evenly, then wrap cloths around, and other things that you know.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, if you release the joint, you will find the bones even, whether they are broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there are any of the two broken, if you restore them as we have said for the two bones of the hand; then place a splint along the length of the bone, and it should be a little wider, then place the bandage as I have said, and tighten it gradually; and if there are two or three, or more, broken, place a splint according to their quantity, wrapped in a piece of linen, and tighten the bandage from above the splint, so that it does not irritate.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you should not forget the other things I have mentioned about other fractures, as we have said; and treat each accident as it should be treated.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the finger bone
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bones of the woman are broken, if the bone is enlarged, then incline it to the back part, and hold it in place; then fill the wound with cotton, and put in as much as possible; then lift the woman, and slowly raise her back, and when the cotton comes out of the wound, the bone returns with the cotton; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, return it, and do this for seven days or so: then the fracture will be restored, and if you see that it is healing, take a bladder of lamb’s wool, and place it on the bone, and blow all the air out of the bladder; then inflate the bladder again, until the bladder is full inside: nature will restore the fracture; then fill it with cotton, and leave it in place for several days, until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the little finger of the hand is broken, or of the woman, if it is reset as we have said in the bone of the shoulder; and these nearby breaks are not hidden from him who puts his study and his use to this book, and pays attention to it.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the broken bone signifies in many positions the right way of restoration: understand this then.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the thigh, when it is broken, take a goose's neck and blow the thigh; then wrap it in cloths, and leave it three days or around, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	of fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for one who has a fracture with wound, even if it is large, such as the bones of the ribs or shoulder or similar, that they be cleansed immediately, so that the cleansings that we have said bear witness.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is cleansed, and the bone is reduced, if you have nothing else, then begin to restore the fractured bone in that same hour, or the next day, before infection comes.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if infection comes, then leave the restoration until the next day, until the infection is calmed, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you will cause bad accidents to occur.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken tooth appears above the gum, it is necessary that you slightly press it lightly with your fingers, extending it gently.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension is not suitable to be placed in your hands, then use this iron tool, which is seven or eight spans long, and its width depends on the size of the wound; and it is necessary for the mirror to take three or four, according to how much he has in each case of breaking; and it should be round and somewhat thick, so that it does not painfully press against the limb at your work, and it should be sharp behind, and thick in the middle in front, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called "palainche", because the patient's finger should be placed on the top of the bone's apparent head; and the hammer is struck once, as much as it returns, and they are evenly aligned against each other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is subtle, and the instruments cannot well grasp the bone, then you must cut off the head of the bone until the instruments have hold.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot bring back the bone as we have said, then use a suitable tool from among the instruments, such as a saw or a chisel, to your power; then roughen and make small scratches on the remaining part of the bone.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is returned, and the pain is great afterwards, massage that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	If you do this until it is in its natural place, then massage the wound with sterile black wine, and properly if it was in a state of swelling; and do not put anything on the wound except oil, that it does not bring on putrefaction and corruption; then administer these things as you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover the covering all around, according to the quantity of the wound, and be careful that the wound is not strained with the fracture; and many times this has been done by fools, and they have brought on infection or death or corrosion at any time; and let the wounds be more gentle and softer than other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that no evil event has occurred, as we have said, and you relieve pain to the limb, but it does not require a splint; then wrap around, in place of a splint, hard cloths, and tie them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days that the wound is closing, remove whatever you have put on top of the wound, and apply a healing ointment, such as tetra-pharmacon and similar.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary to move the limb twice a day, in the morning and at evening, as long as it is sound and healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limbs be aligned in such a way that the bow correlates lightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if they continue to be out of place, and it cannot be set but remains bowed, cut away the small pieces of bone, because it is necessary that you cover the wound with a tent, and remove all those unnecessary pieces that cause that pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula comes to the limb, or in another way of corruption, then it is necessary that you treat it, according to what it says in its previous chapter.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken, and open on the limb, like the bones of the knee or of the shoulder, and other similar large limbs, do not remove it immediately, because often many die, but leave it until it can heal; perhaps it will fall out by itself after twenty or thirty days, then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of the sudden blows that come to the soothe
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We often come after the health of the fractured bone, even when it is near the joint, and the unfortunate thing is to see the shape of the limb; and by chance cannot do the member's natural works.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Therefore, if we have fresh fracture: if you administer stiffening medicines, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocoll, aceite, and similar things, in such a way that you grind any of these or all together, and mix with stiffening wine or abundant honey or vinegar; and put it on the broken bone in stoppers, and hold it tightly, and do not let go in hands later; and then remove it, and start another one until the fracture is healed; or you hold a piece of plaster well made; because the property of the plaster is that it removes all swellings above the limbs; and if the fracture has become hard like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, if the cope above, and making the excess apparent; or you reset it at any saw, until it is healed, and care until it is healthy.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	a weak limb after a fracture
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone is healed, and the limb remains weak and thin afterward, this can be due to many causes: one is because it was tied too tightly, and was not tied as it should have been; or because there were too many bandages, and could not reach the member; or because of too much swelling; or because of too great movements, not in its place; or because it has little blood in its body, it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you reduce the pain, and make the body tense, until the swelling is not multiplied in it; and give baths, and give joy and ease; then put poultice on the limb, so that the poultice attracts to the great swelling, and the swelling often of hot water, until the swelling goes to the member; and returns to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	a crooked limb after healing
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limbs are twisted after restoration, and the bones are broken open, and the shape of the limb is deformed, but it does not affect its original nature: if you do not believe the people who say that one should break the limb completely new, and many have done this in our land; and these practices are blamed, and great harm comes from them, and perhaps death; however, if the adjustments and twists are fresh, it is necessary to apply hot water or softening herbs cooked, such as willow bark, roots, and marshmallow, and similar things; and make a mollifying plaster, such as good-quality hay, and grind mustard with goose grease or sunflower oil, and apply it on top; or take figs that are greasy, and grind them with linseed, and similar medicines that soothe the pain.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And never is it necessary to apply pressure continuously and for a long time to a joint that is already swollen by moisture.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And you should allow movement to the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the twisting is awakened and hardened, like a stone, and it is necessary to remove it with iron, if it covers the joint, make a thin incision; and apply a poultice and rest in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	This begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to none, it must now be brought back against the shoulder blade.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if it is delayed, if the shoulder swells, and perhaps if it is reset to the bone; for it does not matter that it be moved too much where it is swollen: many times, spasms and other pains are brought on; therefore, when this happens, first soothe the pain, then leave it, until the abscess is calmed; then raise the limb with hot water and oil, then gently reset it, and cure each member as it comes back to its bone.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	I have ordered the chapters on the dislocations of the shoulder joint from head to foot.
des mandibules	of the mandibles
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	There are two ways in which the mandibles can be dislocated: either they are slightly displaced from their place and somewhat softened; or they are completely dislocated, hanging downwards, and preventing the tongue from holding the saliva in the mouth, nor can he close his mouth, and wrapping his tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it often returns to its place in many positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if she is whole and completed, it is necessary that you reset her hastily, and do not delay; and in such a manner that the ministers tie the head of the bad joint, and push the teeth slightly out of the one of her hands into the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts; and the other hand be outside, to hold even; and command the bad joint to soften, its jaws, and move them from all parts.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the teeth become even, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if it is difficult to reset, especially if both jaws are involved, raise the tips of high hot oil and oil, until they are lightly reset; do not delay the resetting, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	When they are returned evenly, and the jaw with the painful joint is well closed to prevent softening, put wet cloths on the face made of rose oil and wax, then lightly bind them with soft bands; let the pains sleep on their back, and their jaws should be between two cushions, so that they do not move to the left or right, nor make any effort to open their mouth, but take light food until the pains are gone, and the jaws are healed; then change what they want lightly, and do not exert themselves to open their mouth for eating and drinking, until the jaw is well healed and healthy.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two mandibles cannot be reset to their original position within an hour, and are not converted back to their usual position, then fevers and sweating ensue, along with vomiting of bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	And when you see this, then it is a sign of danger; many times those who have it die within eight days.
de la forcelle	of the forceps
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The forceps cannot be removed from the side of the chest without breaking it, and it is not reset once dislocated, and one can feel it well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is such that the patient should lie on their back, and extend their arms; then press the bone firmly against your palm, and it will return; then apply the ointment and bandage, and hold it in place; the one who is lying on their side cannot be dislocated; if not, and if it is dislocated once, then reset it as we have said; then apply the ointment and bandage, and hold it in place, and command the patient to rest until they are healed; and thus the same is done for the shoulder spica, when it is healed from its bone.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	There are three ways in which the shoulder dislocates: one is that it dislocates at the part of the armpit to the outside; and the second is at the part of the elbow; and sometimes at the part above, and this happens rarely; and it does not dislocate backwards for the shoulder, and it does not dislocate inwards through the nerves; and often it dislocates outwards towards the armpit, especially to those who have little fat, because to these it dislocates harshly; to those who have enough fat, it dislocates gently, and returns gently.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance, some men have had compression or crushing, and the shoulder has swollen with an abscess, and thought it was dislocated due to this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	Then you must examine him until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	It is known that the dislocation is when it is below the acromion, and it sets apart the sick shoulder from the healthy one, and you will find between them clear differences; and you will find at the top of the shoulder a fossa, and below the acromion the top of the shoulder, as if it were an os; and the evil cannot move its hand to its neck, nor move from any movements; and also, if it is dislocated above, if it is not hidden, because you will clearly see it at the back; and this kind of dislocation is not other than to be reset, when it is new, or when the evil is in the dislocation.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the manner is that the minister lifts the hand of the injured person upwards, then places his fingers below the joint, and pulls the joint upwards to the shoulder; and the minister lifts the hand, and extends it upwards, then puts it down quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if she does not come as we have said in the previous days, then it is necessary that the dislocated joint be soaked in hot water; and the minister should soften and moisten it with a decoction of althea and fenugreek and melilot in hot water, and apply it; then place the dislocated joint on its back, and put a cloth of equal width, neither too soft nor too hard, under the joint, then put the foot of the injured person on top of the cloth, and lift the shoulder gently, and take the hand of the injured person; and other ministers should wet the head of the injured person, so that it does not move downwards; this shoulder is now back in place, and if you see that it is held in place by following this method: and it is necessary that you have someone who is larger than the injured person; and stand on the side of the chest, and push the shoulder of the injured person away from under the dislocated joint, and lift the joint upwards, so that the dislocated joint hangs in the air; and other ministers should take the hand of the injured person down towards the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the pain is too light, you can do nothing with it, and the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And the resetting is done in another way: and it is that you take a long thin stick made of wood, like a dart, but not too thick or too sharp; then put it outside the painful part, but with a soft cloth on top, and the joint should be extended along the length of the stick; then extend your hand from the other side in the same way, and the joint will return to its place quickly; and if for all these things that we have said, she does not want to return, do this cure: take a stick of two arms wide and four fingers long, which has the head round to enter through the opening from outside, in this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then tie the head of the dislocated shoulder with a soft cloth that was not causing the pain, then remove it from the dislocated position; extend the affected arm upwards, and tie the dislocation above the elbow; and place the hand on the shoulder of the other hand, then put the arm over a wide-bladed knife, and extend the hands downwards, and leave the body hanging from the other side: the joint is now healed.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when she is healed in whatever way it may be, you should place a soft cloth pad evenly over the shoulder and around, then apply the plaster with powder from the mill, with incense and a little egg, over the entire shoulder and around, then remove the bandage evenly from the shoulder, and return the limb to the plaster, and embrace the hand to its collar, and let the hands remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he change little, until the limb is comforted, for it will heal faster; then change after five or seven days, and move it; and if it is stiff and not softened, it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is strong due to moisture that has come, or for other reasons, then you should administer cautery at three places, as it is placed in front of or in the chapter on cauteries.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all of this, and it dislocates after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot raise the arm above, then cut the nerve at the top of the shoulder that is twisted or stretched or softened; and cut that the joint has never been fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that is above the knees and behind, or below, is caused by impact and stretching of the hands, and there is another remedy; and it should be treated until it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if afterwards the member becomes stiff and moves slowly, then use the hairs many times in a bath until that stiffness is relieved, and returns to its original form.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	That the joint of the shoulder is dislocated and returns; and it has been dislocated from all parts, and even in front and behind, and the dislocation is not yet healed, for one can see and feel it well; and it is dislocated according to each shape.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	When you join the dislocated shoulder with its joint, then open it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	Because the joint is swollen, and cannot bear the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary to reset the joint as soon as possible, because if it is not reset, it will be painful to reset; and perhaps it cannot be reset at all, especially when it is in the back; it is better than other dislocations, and causes more great pain, and perhaps it kills.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is, when it can be reset, that you extend your hand to your two hands; and its arms are expanded, and the hands of the other on either side of the shoulder, out and in, and bring the joint together with its tendons together, or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, then it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and holds the root of the palm which is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if he does not want to return to the place, then apply strong extension; and if two people extend the arm, and hold it with two people, so that it does not move during extension; then turn the arm from each part, then having wrapped a long and wide cloth around it; when you see the joint at the hand, if there is any oil to soften the joint, then press the joint together, as much as it returns; and when it is in place, put a dry plaster with some honey on it, and hold it together, and put the arm against the bad side, and leave it for some time, then remove it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firm in its place, then release the limb, and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not hold well, then restart the bandage and the limb, and leave it thus for some time, until it is firmly placed; then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if it feels gripping after the return of the joint, and it moves, then bathe and rub it well, and press until it is soothed; or you put above the joint a piece of fat mutton, then leave it for a day and a night, then remove it, and put in a bath; and when it sweats, rub the joint immediately, then put the piece of fat mutton back on, and then put in a bath; and so do twice or three times until it is healed; and if you see, then put above the joint a piece of moist cloth warmed with butter, and press it on; it will return to its position.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The joint of the hand is dislocated, and the return is lighter than other joints. Nevertheless, it should be quickly reset to its place in the same moment it is dislocated, as long as the bones are swollen or there is an abscess present.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And the resetting is done by placing the misaligned hand on a table, extending the fingers of the hand, and aligning the palm so that it rests on the appearance of the joint, and gently pushing until it returns to its place. Then, you should check if it is properly reset; then, place the misaligned hand on a table for extension and resetting.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, put the patient's hand on a table, and the assistant puts their hand over the appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, it is well. If not, apply warm compresses to the abscess and let it rest until you can begin again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in place after some time, the joint will remain twisted; and do not pull anything from the patient until the hand is clean, and cannot be stretched: then cut the nerve or artery; if there is no other method than to stretch by fire through the skin, and perhaps nothing else is better.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, put the plaster that we have mentioned above, then strain and leave it for three days, then remove it and leave it thus.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is no swelling, then apply hot water mixed with salt, and rub until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the two fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	The two fingers of the hand are not dislocated at each part, neither at the back of the palm nor at the belly; therefore, keep the finger straight and reset the dislocation to your fist as long as it returns, then support the head of the finger, and move it towards the part where it is disjointed; and leave it for three days, and then put it in place that day; and bind it as we have said, and remove it the next day, and make it move, and reattach it; and do this often until it is tight, and do the same if it is dislocated at the belly of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed; and do the same when it is dislocated in other parts.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	displacement of the spine on the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spine on the back or neck is dislocated, and there are many dislocations, there is no cure, as the patient dies from the pain.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs are such that the excretions jump out involuntarily, and cannot be held, and often the limbs become soft, or the two thighs or the two arms or one, and often the spine moves at the back; this is called "gibosity": the cure is to reward the gibosity if it came from childhood: if there is no cure or healing for the whole.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And those that come from falling or from percussions or similar things, they said in the old ways of cures by great words, but I have abbreviated them according to my intention, and I have formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the region that comes to the front of the shoulder, there is no engine or health; and also the one that comes directly to the second rib, and one cannot cure it other than the proper one that comes to the back, as I said; and it is that the hairs should be stretched out over its face evenly, and he should have some strain outside of him, so that he does not bleed; then make the first bandage at the top in earth form, and the other at the bottom, and tie one ligature outside of the hairs of the wound, and the other as the hips, and as the knees, and as the ankles; and two ministers should hold the ligatures, one at the top and the others at the bottom, among the two bandages; and they should be well tied, the bandage as we have said, and the hand puts its palms over the spine evenly, until it is healed.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return by this treatment, take a long table of three arms' length, and twist it out of shape, and the hairs should be on one side, and bite the edge of the table from the outside, then place the middle of the table on the spine; and put the mirrors on the other end of the table, and press firmly until it returns to its original position; and if you see, do it with the hand that turns back.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And you should tie two ropes at the top of the shoulder of one arm, and on both sides of the foot, and between each rope, on either side, a palm's length of long rope; and in each rope, one knot, or the twisted part, and let the ropes be firmly on the ground so they do not move; and between each two ropes, one rope turning around, towards the direction the twisted part turns, and a small rope of a palm's length of long rope, to turn the twisted part; and then tie the ligament that is among the tendons to the twisted part towards the shoulder, and the other ligament to the foot on the other twisted part, and each minister should turn their twisted part along the entire limb, and the master should put the spine in place as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when it is even, apply a drying plaster with an abundance of honey, and then wrap it, and then place it on a plate of three inches of length, which supports the neck of the spine and the part of the spine, as we have said, and use subtle pressure until they are healed; and if anything comes at the end of health, then administer medicines that are softening and pain-relieving, with the remedy that we have mentioned before; and never give one piece of plaster, and never appear in the back spine of the back, and be careful not to have presumption: perhaps it would bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	of shoulder dislocations
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	There are no fractures of the shoulder joint and the shoulder joint is dislocated in four parts: inwards and outwards, and forwards and backwards; and more inwards than that, and less dislocated forwards and backwards.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of the dislocation inwards is such that when the crooked leg is joined with the straight one, it is longer and more open than the straight one, and cannot double its knee to the fire; and this is because the patient has an abscess underneath.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of one who comes after this is that these accidents are contrary to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of one who has it in front are that he is well-aligned with his leg according to completion; however, if he doubles over with pain in the groin, and they want to make him walk, he cannot go forward, and retains his urine, and swells with anger, and when he goes, he passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of one who has it in back are that he cannot spread his groin, nor double over, and the other leg is more twisted than the other, and the anger is softened, and the shoulder is dislocated to the side of the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The symptoms of this type of dislocation are such that if the joint is reset, it remains in place according to its natural position, and there is no treatment; and there is no need for presumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in this case where the dislocation is fresh, and there are four ways of dislocation, you must return the joint, extend it, and move it to the left and right; perhaps if it returns, and there is no need for other treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this manner, you must apply one strong minister, and extend the leg strongly at two fingers, or at one finger that is tied above the knee; and other ministers hold their hand over the tailbone in a certain way so that they bite their hands off their sides, then pinch the skin on the back; and some tie the head of the limb; and extend up and down all at once, until the pain is lifted from the ground at once, and remains hanging.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common for four similar cases, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is well.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If not, then you must treat its similarity. When the dislocation is in the pelvis, you should support the misaligned limb on its healthy side, then place the bandage under the root of the thigh, and the limb that is outside the groin, then extend the bandage upwards towards the groin and the hip; then take other ministers to hold the large thigh muscle misaligned, and stretch it properly: it will return to its place now; and this method of dislocation is less painful than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot hold it in this manner that we have said, then it is necessary to tie the two hairs of the limp together with a strong rope above the two heels, and above the two ankles, and let the limp leg be stretched out two fingers more than the others; then it should be suspended over the top of a stick, and let the other arm hang down two arms' length from the ground; then command the minister to grasp the base of the neck, and let another minister hold the limp, who should grasp the neck formally, for the joint is now approaching.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocation is in the lower part, then massage the hairs, as we have said in the one with gout, and pull the rope properly over the limp leg and also at the foot; then put two ties, one at the head and the other at the foot, then fold the tie between the legs of the limp in the proper form; and place moist cloths around it, so that it does not become dry, then extend each minister towards him, and the patient puts the dislocation equal to his hand.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, place it on the table, and press it as we have described in the gibbosity, and grind the bones on the flat side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the misaligned leg firmly, as I have said; and place the fingers of the pain above the crooked leg, then press with the other hand, and extend it downwards towards the groin.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is in the back, it is not necessary to extend the misaligned leg downwards, nor to lift it up, but it should be as it was when the hips were dislocated in the back, as we have said about lying on the two hips; and it should be on its face, and the limb extended as we have said before, and one should press on the joint at the table; and it will be good when the legs are extended, and they are even; then bend the knees, and put the poultice, and the strap of a bandage, so that the hip does not move; and let it rest for three days or four, then release it, and put the poultice on; and if you see that they are even, remove the strap, as before, and leave it for three days; then release it, and make the limb move well, until the limb is comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the shoulder dislocation
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The shoulder is dislocated in three ways: namely, from within and without, and from behind; and it does not dislocate forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the signs are that you command the patient to bend their leg at the hip, and if they cannot bend it at the hip, it indicates that it is dislocated; and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend their leg if possible, and place your back against their face, and place their foot on yours; then take their shoulder to your palms, and pull between your fingers, then bend the two sides of the shoulder correctly; and another minister extends their foot, until the shoulder returns to its place, and the sign is that they can bend their leg at the hip lightly; and apply the plaster to it, and support the leg against the hip for a few minutes or hours, then release it; and do not work on the patient any more until their members are comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	If the limbs are not broken, administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the back, until they are healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the ankle dislocation
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The feet are never bruised and never completely dislocated, both inside and outside.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the bone is out of place, and feels tender to the touch at the part where it is dislocated: the reflexes are light, and one should gently extend them slightly when they are pressed alone.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is dislocated completely, you should straighten the painful part correctly, and hold it with your hands above the ankle; then grasp the bone with your right hand, and then with your left hand twice, then extend it upwards, and strongly tap the bone upwards; do this twice, as we have said, bending and drawing the bone; if it returns, it is well; if not, if you repeat the procedure, it will return; and if it cannot return in this way, place the painful part on its back on the ground, and firmly press between his thighs, and wrap cloths around, so that it does not bend the bone; then hold the hands on his thigh, and another person extends the bone to his hands or to the ligament, so that they hold it above the bone; then extend all the hands equally, and the cloths should be placed between the thighs of the painful part to retain the dislocation while you are extending it; then place the bones evenly in your hands, and another person holds the leg straight at the back, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it does not heal, put the plaster on and apply pressure above, and let the swelling form, and tie the leg to the foot, and support the tendons that are above the ankle behind, so that the joints are not too stretched; then leave it for two or three days, and if the swelling does not subside, then let it rest for another two or three days, and after that, let it go to walk for four days; and if it goes before that time, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes, it is necessary to treat it as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
des dois	For the fire cautery, instruct
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the two are dislocated, if they need to be stretched, it is a simple matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in no way out of place, then you should sit the patient on a chair or table straight up, and put your hand on what opens these joints, then press firmly with your hand until it returns; and when it is even, and there is nothing open, then remove the sole of the foot from the table, put a table to the two knees, then stretch it firmly, and leave it for three hours, then release; and let him rest, until he is well.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wounds and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound comes with dislocation, and one wants to restore it, often the patient dies: if you are not presumptuous in the cure, and do not know the art well, and have not used it long, and are not pitiful and merciful and late; and at the beginning of things, use gentle remedies for abscesses, and leave the wound in God's hands, if you do not see hope of health; and when you see hope, then reset the member now, as long as the abscesses are coming; and when the member is in place, administer gentle remedies for abscesses, and cure the wound, as it should be, by frequent drying; and if with dislocation there is a breakage, and small bones are to be removed, then remove them, and do what we have said in simple diseases; and guard against entering the path of fear, according to what I have said, because it is better for you according to your Creator, and for the knowledge of your armor and body.
Amen	For the fire cautery
