O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	Oh, most dear children, I have completed this book that is the back of the science of medicine, and I have filled it with its contents, and I have finished it by its explanations and by its statements.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is fortified in our region and is extracted from all, it is perished by science and plundered, and nothing remains but the small descriptions in the books of the ancients that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this comes the error and the vanity, and the minds are closed and the knowledge is distant.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems to me that I can revive this treatment together with the order of exposure and declaration and abbreviation; and I will bring together the forms of cauterizing irons, and other tools of the work with the explanation and preparation of them, as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	Because for the reason that no good skilled hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is extended.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for him who undertakes it to surmount in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until he knows the judgment of the limbs, and their forms and conjunctions and separations of them, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and sinews and the number of veins, and the movement and resting of them, and the source of their issue.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And because of this, Hippocrates says that with the body, it is not much, and with work, it is little; and similarly in the art of hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you at the beginning of this book that those who are not familiar with the things mentioned before, if they attempt to practice without understanding and harm people; thus I have often seen many of those who meddle in this science and abandon themselves to ignorance and lack of experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a foolish man who cut into an abscess of scrofula or the neck of a woman, and cut the arteries of the neck; because so much blood came out that the woman died between his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	And another case treated a stone from a man of age, and the stone was large; it carried away with it a piece of the bladder, and died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called for the extraction, and saw the position of the misalignment and the size of the stone, and if it was cut, it would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another case where the duke of our land who had broken his leg, and with the fracture had a wound; and the doctor held the fracture above the wound for a long time, and did not let any blood out of the wound, and so it ended in this way; and he commanded that it not be moved at all; and so the leg became completely swollen and the foot and came to destruction.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and he urged me to come to dislocate his leg; and when I heard it was dislocated, it was in place and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But all ways of the corruption were already confirmed in the member, and it could not be healed; and the corruption did not cease to spread throughout the limb until the limb was entirely lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another way that would crush the abscess and cause it to fester, and then inflame due to its lord's evil.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a pustule, when it is pure of melancholic humor, does not require that one touch it with iron if it is not in the limb where one can remove everything that is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	Therefore, dear son, it is necessary for you to know that work of hands is divided into two divisions: namely, where there is fear and danger; and I will show in each part of this book where it has fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Therefore, it is necessary for you to guard against this, so that the foolish may not speak evil of you; if you take up your weapons firmly and strongly, and use the best way, by the grace of God you will come to salvation and be saved; leave behind the spreading diseases of great sickness; remove the doubts from your mind, and have faith in yourself so that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galen advises in some of his warnings: "Do not take care of a sick person who is not called a foolish physician.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatment according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters are of fire cauteries and non-fire medical cautery, and the chapters are ordered from the head to the feet; and the forms of instruments, and the irons of cautery, and all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapters are of cutting and piercing, and wounds, and extraction of arrows, and similar things; and the chapters are ordered and the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is ordered from the head to the feet, and the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	As we remember from the work, it is necessary for me to tell the quality of the help and harm of each condition.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of help and harm are the longest and most subtle speech and secret knowledge; and because of this, many wise men spoke about it and agreed to it; and I do not speak much about it, because I shorten it.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that the fire cauterization helps universally in all conditions where there is matter, because the conditions are: that is to say, hot condition with matter, and dry condition without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry weather, they all agreed that the fire cautery is great help; but others said the opposite: that the fire cautery is only helpful for diseases that come from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	Because the nature of fire is hot, and should not be cured by heat or dryness; and those who said the opposite claimed that the fire cautery is very helpful for hot and dry diseases that come from the body of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of man and its moisture to the hot fire, you will find the body warm.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it once by experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And all ways, do not interfere unless those who have experienced it, and who know the chapter on cautery from long use, and the diversity of human constitutions, and their dispositions and causes of diseases, and the remedies and space of time; for other constitutions we have no fear, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the hairs gathered and agreed to the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, sons, that the cautery together with fire is one of the secrets of healing, and has greater goodness than burning medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	The remedies are simple, and they only come to the member that is cooked, and do not harm other members unless named.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The fiery medicines come from one member to another by removing them, and they bring diseases of great relief to the affected member; and perhaps the evil is the remedy for its high price and because of the goodness of its substance, it does not harm if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And I have found it by experiment and by the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it is above the truth of things; and because I excuse myself from the length of speech, for I do not like to give you the secret which is hidden or fire, and the quality of the work, how it heals diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; now receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they should be done with fire cautery in which manner, and if pricking at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that fire cautery is beneficial in all cases, because the harm that comes from it is easily removed by its help; and even if it is for necessary pain, it cannot wait until the time when greater harm comes to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And do not think like the foolish people; for the disease that is healed by fire cautery has no recurrence; and they say it is so; but it is not as they think, because fire cautery is only medicine that moves the complexion, and dries the humors that are the cause of pain, and is worth all other medicine for its speed and value, and for the virtue of its work and its authority.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And the first thing is that the disease comes not always according to the temperament of the sick person and the part of the body affected by the disease and its power; and there are assembled in him the superfluities by the acquisition of foods and similar things, unless cauteries are administered to him where he has little superfluity and moisture, as cauteries of dense for the pain, and similar things, and the pain does not return much; but there is little.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the last resort of medicine, and that is true; but they do not believe that cauteries work after medicine, but their intentions are false, and it is cauteries that are the last resort of medicine because when we administer methods of cures in any disease and they do not work, then we administer the cauteries, and it is worth it.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, it is important to know that cauterization is a part of medicine, not according to the intentions of those who are misled.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cauterization with a gold instrument is better than iron, and they did not say why except for the quality of gold and the purity of its substance; and they said that the wounds of cautery do not putrefy, but I have found that it is not always true, as I have experienced, and cauterization with gold is better than iron, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And when you heat the gold instrument, you should not be sure about its temperature because of the color of gold, and it has sometimes cooled down; and if it is heated too much, they put it in the fire; and thus there is enough precaution.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And because of this, we use fire cauterization that we have prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or I have ordered this chapter on the shoulder joint from toes, because it is easier to find there.
dou cautere olivaire	The oil cauterization
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cauterization is good for moisture and coldness over the skull, and it is done in two ways due to a disease called "soda", and due to many humors that descend from the joint to the eyes, and to the ears, and for multitude of dreams and toothache and throat pain, and even for all diseases that come from coldness such as paralysis and soda and apoplexy and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cauterization is that the hairs are removed by medicinal solution, changing the skin three or four times, according to the virtues and the age and the custom of the hair, so that it can suffer; then make the hair again.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	Then make it sit crosswise between your hands, and put its hands on top of the peas; after that, put the root of your palm above the root of its nose between its two eyes; and when you see your fingers coming out, if it bleeds from the wound then heat the cauterization which is called "olivare", of which this is the form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place the joint signified by ink on the limb, and in pulling down and stretching your hand little by little, then release your hand gently, and reward the limb if you see the bone slightly; and if you do not see it, restart the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you; afterwards take a little silk, and put it in awe and soft cotton inside, and place on the limb, and leave it for three hours; afterwards put on a burden of moilliet; and leave it until the burn is healed; afterwards care for the wound which is called «tetrafarmaçon» until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the old ones said that the longer the wound remains open, the more it purges; and for this reason, it helps to heal.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And none of these said that the cauterizer should be applied as much as a part of the bone is burned, and then what is burned from the bone is removed, and it is cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And the others said that the cauterizer should be applied less high above, and if it is pounded as much as a part of the bone is removed, as wide as the oil that women put in their hair to make the humors flow out; and the wound should remain open for a long time; after that, it should be cured and covered.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two methods of cauterization do not seem to me to be entirely good for all purposes, except in some people where there is a view of fear; and I think that I should leave it; because the injured are weakened by continuous solutions of nature, as we testify in other members; and even when the injured is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterization is less painful and milder for me, and from this use I work in the following manner.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the ancient pain of the main
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When the main pain comes from chronic conditions and lasts a long time, one should use remedies of the year and pills called "cochie", and cleansing of head and eyes and plasters; and if one does the cauterization that we have mentioned before, and it is not worth it.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care when the patient has a severe illness, and that it is not too hot; then cauterize with that fire cautery which we have mentioned above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est I leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After performing cauterization on each of the horns to the bone, as we have mentioned before, and using the cautery called "vasselz"; and place it in the holes where you put suctions; and raise your hand so that you do not see too close to the bone: the hairs feel much greater pain in this cauterization than in others, and I will speak of it later; and it is necessary that the cautery of the horns be more subtle than that with which one cauterizes the middle of the head, and it is as follows:
dou cautere dou chief	fire cauterization of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When in a part of the head there is sudden pain, and the disease extends to the bone, and the patient is purged by waters that are not modified, and the other treatments that I have mentioned in the division of diseases have not helped: then I apply cauterization in two ways, that is to say by medicine and by fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cauterization by medicine is such that you press a small sponge and take off the skin and apply it to the two places, and then make the temple where the pain is located in such a way that you can replace the sponge outside the skin; and when it is replaced, hold and keep it well for twelve hours; and then remove it and treat further with a poultice of bread, and leave the wound for two or three days; then put on a wet cloth soaked in butter until the pain is relieved.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment of wounds until they are healed; and if you see that some medicines cause burning, I have written or advised treating burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The fire cauterization is done in this way.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the fire cauterization as follows:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "clos" because the head is made in the shape of a clo or it has a small beak, and in the middle has a small appearance; and put it on the painful limb, and hold your hand and gently strike the fire once, until half of the hot substance is burned away; and release your hand so that the artery does not burn, as it is before, and bleeds abundantly.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After putting cotton on a string and placing it on the limb for three days; then put cotton moistened in honey on it, and then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed; and if you wish to cauterize this wound with the cautery called "cultellare", be careful not to cover the artery in this wound which is not ancient.
de emigraine	of the wound
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat the wound as we have previously said in the divisions of diseases, and it does not improve, and you see that the cauteries before mentioned do not make much difference and do not seem to be very effective, then it is necessary to extinguish the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white; and then place a line of half an inch of bone on the limb, and take your hand once, and keep it from covering the artery and not coming close to the bone; and watch for the jaw which moves when chewing, and that the nerves have no reaction except that they move and that spasm does not cause pain, and watch for the flow of blood from the artery when it is cut, or when it is cut, there is great fear and immediately to that which is not known, and which is not studied and experienced; and leave the work in one way; but I will tell you how to stop the flow of blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it appears in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this fire cautery does not suffice for the disease, and the patient is in pain, cauterize the wound as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said or from the chapter of extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has two needles; and this fire cautery is better and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain of the ears on account of cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When the ear hurts from cold, and medicines have been applied and other treatments that we have said in the division, and the pain does not subside, then warm this cautery which is called "poins", of which this is the form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait X poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After pricking all around the ear, where the pain is felt in both places, and moving it slightly away from the root of the ear, as you have indicated the point of entry; and with X points around each ear; after healing the ear as long as it is healthy.
de la torture de la bouche	of the mouth torture
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture that should be treated with caution is no more than those that move from a stream, such as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not use fire cautery on similar things that come from scorpion and snake venom.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When treating this similar type of torture that moves from a stream of water and from the throat and gargling, and it does not help, then it is necessary to cauterize the pain with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and the other a little further from the temple, and the third in the setting of the two lips; and put the cautery in the part that opens healthily, and the cautery on the top of the ear above a little out of the corner of the ear, and another in the temple as long as a pinch; and leave the cauterization as long as half of the wound is healed; and this is the form of the cauterization:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it is similar to the cauterizing tool that we have placed before, but it is a bit more subtle and requires that the knife be a bit larger; after treating the wound as I have previously mentioned, for as long as it is healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres: II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have mentioned before, and it does not improve, and the pain does not have fever, then do four cauteries: two on the two horns of the head, and one in the middle of the head, and one on the part called «vasselz» as we have mentioned before, and the back cautery through the mouth of the stomach; and treat it as we have mentioned before.
de litargie	of laziness
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease, it is recommended to give the patient large and modified brain-altering pills; after rubbing the entire head of the patient, place the mustard plaster on the occipital region, which is written or treated with poultices; and this is the method of cauterization: if you do as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is thus healthy, good; and if not, make three cauterizations on the head in descending from the neck to the collarbone, and space between each cauterization one inch; and the cure as with the others, and if you have seen an increase, and the illnesses are suffering, make one cauterization in the middle; and if the work is, two more above the two horns, and the cure until it is healthy; and let the cauterizations called "olivare", as I have already said.
de la froidor dou chief	of the cold of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be cleaned of years and moisture as we have previously said; after heating the head with evil, then perform cauterization on the head and each horn, and behind and three times above the spine of the neck; and if you have more trouble, and the body is wet and the pains are suffering, and the disease is not gone, then perform four cauterizations above the spine of the back; and leave it until the most painful part is healed, and remove your hand; afterwards, cure it as long as it is healthy, and let the cauterizations that are called «olivare» as we have previously said.
de l’epilempsie	Of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use cauterization except for that which is fleamatic, and it is first necessary to modify the brain of years and other treatments that we have said in the division when the limbs are large and suffer greatly from painful medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a child who cannot suffer, make them gargle and chew, modifying the brain often with good meats; afterwards, boil the head in the middle, and then apply cauterization as we have said before, and cauterize on the vessel and on each horn; and if the limbs are far and suffer greatly, apply cauterization as I have said to those who have paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauterization be with olive oil as I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the pain is intense, then perform cauterization with fine fire in this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to melancholy, the excess or corrupted moisture is flowing heavily, then cauterize with fine cauteries as we have said for those who have paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to melancholy, the excess or corrupted moisture is flowing downwards towards melancholy, and the body is wet with it, then give them something to drink that cleanses the mind, according to what it is before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After removing the head of the pain; after making a well-made tortilla, like a circle, and putting it on the head; and if the pain increases, and is held firmly on all sides; then present the liniment, and use old butter of beeswax; and heat it gently in fire, so that the patient can bear it; after emptying the circle from inside onto the head, and let it cool; and do this to the pain every week once with other good governance until they are healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	When you see the fire cautery being performed by making many pricks with the entire cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This method of cautery moistens the brain, and then place on it a cotton swab in butter and in chicken fat.
de l’awe des eulz	of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the eye comes first to the eyes by the signs that I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient a drink of a medicine melting the head, and keep it from all moisture, and let it sweat or bathe several times a day.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	Then command him to turn his head, and let the fire cautery be applied to the head, and let two cauteries be made on the two temples simultaneously, or in one; and cover all the cautery with all the veins and arteries that are outside the skull, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and keep from bleeding of blood, and if you see too much blood flowing, then stop it as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision of the cauterization as you would do it; and never has anyone cautery or heated anything outside the two lower bones.
dou cors des larmes	The path of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are above the veins, or below the arteries that are in the appearance of the main deformed; and one sees that it is superfluous cold fluffy, then one does the cauterization that I have said at the beginning of the work descending as follows: I cauterize the chief, and II cauterize above the two temples, and II cauterize outside the two bones; and if there is more, then one cauterizes wisely above the sore with every small cauterization.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	through the paths of tears through the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you medicine according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help, then drink a draught of three bad herbs; after that, apply the king's oil, and make two cautery burns called "clavilis" on the two sores, a little outside the chest; and be careful not to cover the artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize with this cautery called "olivare".
de coi ci est li forme:	of this shape:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that it is necessary to apply the cautery twice on the two splints as long as the splints are; and do not leave the hand except until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	the hairs that do not oil
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Never have it happen that the hairs of the oil are converted to parchment, and prick the oil, and if it is done with cauteries in two ways: that is to say, by fire, or by burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow long and even, then place the hairs in your hand; afterwards, hold the eyelids open with a figure that is as equal as possible to the shape of the eyebrows, and begin the sign above the hairs; then put cotton wool moistened in egg yolk and musk on the oil, then heat the cauterizing iron:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing a little and a little more each time, until the curing is in the right place; and the sign of the health of the work is that you see the eyelids retreat, and the hairs stand up at the point of the oil; then lift your hand, and leave it so for three hours, then put cotton wool moistened in butter until the burn is healed; afterwards, dress the wound until it is healthy.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if the hairs come afterward, and the paper is softened accordingly, then begin the cautery on the same spot again, as you did before; and if the hairs are missing, then cauterize until the paper reaches its natural position, and is even, and do not prick at the hairs with it.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The cautery of burning medicine is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; then make a piece of parchment in the shape of a mint leaf; then take French soap and live charcoal, each one by itself, and grind them together well; and apply it vigorously, so that it does not cool, then spread it on the shape you have made like the mint leaf, and put it on the paper eyes; and if the patient only holds in the oil, then open it and do the same on both sides; and put cotton moistened with oil behind; and the patient should be in a healthy state and show the medicine to the doctor, and press the potion and move it all the time that the patient feels the sting of the medicine, for it feels stinging like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then take the medicine at your discretion.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the mordication is passed, if the limb has been raised from above, and it rises as it was raised by constraint of fire or by incision; and if it is thus, then it is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, then continue to apply the medicine above the limb or until the medicines have worked, as long as your work is even and your eyes are steady; then put cotton moistened in water on the wound until the wounds are chosen, after care the limb of the injury which is called «dyafenis» and others, until they are healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you have the task of guarding your work well by great care that it not be pierced by those who know no medicine.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hair prick at the oil, then begin medicine again on that one who is molded by the proper paper, as you have done before; after curing until they are healed; and this is the form of the fleece of the miracle:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And since the hairs of men are diverse in size and smallness, and according to what your constraints are; and do not answer in the right way to that one who is the study of this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	of the treatment of fistulas by cauterization
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat fistulas as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not work, then it is necessary to cauterize them in this way.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Command the patient to put his head in your safe hands; and clean the remedies on his head between your hands in this way: that he does not move, nor remove his head; afterwards put moistened cotton on the wound or on the juice of wormwood over the oil; afterwards heat the cauterizing iron which is there: and it is fastened to the head as if it were the form of a pen of blistering beetle, together with that which is the cauterizing iron; if you see, whether it is appointed from one head to the other, and if you see, whether it is also like a tent; but all the same, this which is fastened is good for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula has opened, and in it is the pus, and dry; and if it is closed, if you open it, and take out the bowels; after putting the cauterizer hot properly, and hold your hand on the cauterizer to the part of the neck below the oil, that your hands do not go crazy; and put the cauterizer in the grease of the oil, and corrupt.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cauterizer on the bone, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, if you start the cauterizer again once more, and if you have the skill, and leave it for three days; after that put on cotton moistened in butter, and the ointment of desiccating until it is healed, and if forty days pass before it is healed, then put on medicine acid corrosive until the bone is discovered; and the king according to what he would have in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula that none of the ancients mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	To the fistula, and fasten the leg; afterwards put in the sharp, subtle knife of which this is the form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	And they make of the quantity of one or two drops; and hold your hand firmly on the knife, and do not move the hairs until the blood flows to its oil; and it is necessary to put above the oil on the hair a soft cotton ball in front of or behind: the blood stops the leakage of the leg of the fistula, and the healthy by miraculous healing.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the sinus is healed by the cauterization we have mentioned, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, then you must apply pus to the sinus, and bring the fistula back to its proper place in the bone according to what is appropriate for that limb.
des crevaices en levres	mouth sores
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times there are mouth sores in the lips that are called "herpes", and also in the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these sores as we have mentioned in the divisions, and the treatment does not help, then use a small cauterizing knife in this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place the patient in those cracks until he reaches just before dawn; then treat the broken leg with plaster until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess in the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or in the uvula, or palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it has fermented and rotted and become swollen and turned into a fistula; and if it does not improve, then you must use cauterization according to the size of the fistula; afterwards, plug or puncture the fistula, and keep your hand there until the iron becomes red at the tip of the iron, and behind the elbow; and do this once or twice, after which treat as we have said in our treatises on wounds, until it is healed; and if it is cured thus, it is good; but if not, then you must expose the limb and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat them with medicines but it does not work, then put the hot iron in your mouth; afterwards heat the cautery in a certain way that you put a piece of cloth on the tooth; and apply the cautery deeply and firmly, and hold your hand as long as the pain feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; then release your hand and continue the cautery according to your will; afterwards fill the gums with salted water, and let them rest for an hour.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in a similar manner, the tooth that was moving is stabilized, and the gum softened, held back, and the moisture corrupted dried.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When pain in the teeth comes from cold, or there is cold or wetness, and medical treatments are not effective, then it is necessary to use cauterization in two ways: cauterization with butter and cauterization with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cauterization with butter is such that you take butter from a freshly boiled pot, and the end of a sharp iron or brass needle; then take cotton and wrap it over the point of a tent, and moisten it in the hot butter, and place it on the painful tooth firmly and hold it until it is cooled; and so do often enough for its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see that moistened wool and cotton in hot butter is placed on the aching tooth, and the heated iron is held against the cheek until the heat reaches the movement of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	When using the fire cautery, ensure that the iron or brass instrument is large enough that it does not reach the mouth of the wound; heat the cautery, so that it forms a shape afterwards, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery has cooled; do this often, as the pain will be lessened by the next day or the following day.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is necessary that the wound fill its mouth with good butter in the urgency of this cautery, and then remove it; and this is the shape of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And do a fire cauterization on the desired head, as you wish, according to what you have available; and this is the form of the cane:
des scrophules	of thorns
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the thorns are wet and cold, and do not obey digestion with medicines, then heat the cauterized hair of this part, and make two openings for the fumes to escape from the other side; and put the cauterizer hot above the abscess once, or as often as it is necessary, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, put the cauterizer according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it for three days; and put on cotton moistened in butter until the burn is healed; then treat the wound with ointments and tents until it is healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	The shape of the skull:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When the humors overflow through the channels of the body, and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary to first remove the hairs by medicinal solutions; after that, cauterize at the root of the throat, and be careful not to come too close to the throat, and do not burn too much but with a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that, make another cauterization at the joint of the neck to the base of the spine, and let the cauterizations called "clavile" be as we have in front; and cure the limb as we have said until it is healed.
de la toust	of the tooth
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and disease of the tooth are of moisture that is cold, and the pain has no fever or sweat, and the disease is ancient, then make two cauterizations on the forceps in their own sight; and the other cautery comes between the two breasts; and let the cauteries which is called «clavile» according to the form that is before said.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see, make cauterization by holding the entire cauterizer which is called «poins» because of the form that is above in the disease of the ears; and let the points be just under thirty, or around it.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After treatment, the patient according to what has been said before, and let the cauteries be applied three times according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And because the cauteries are lighter, because you make three in a row.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the shoulder dislocation
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Afterwards, shave the hairs above their back and on their ribs; afterwards, apply heat to the area where the joint is misaligned with your right hand; and if the joint is still misaligned inside, then apply the cauteries that have two needles in this form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and cauterize the wound as long as it pierces just to the costal, and bring together four cauteries; and for this reason, cauterization is made with the cauterizer that has three needles, because the number of cauterizations is four needles; and the nerves are according to the subtlety of a tent, and this is the form of the cauterizer that has three needles.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And never place it above this one nerve because it has eight cauterizations.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After place the cauterizer on the wound and bend with silk; after rest the pain, and do not move the member by length too long until it is well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above, this thing happens quickly, then make a fire on the thick edge of the cauterizer, or many fires in holding.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and it is healed by the moisture and is free from the pain.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When in the stomach come cold and much moisture until it is adjusted to its condition, and are multiplied by the diarrhea to him, and are customary ways of treatment and he does not improve, then it must be that the pain is supported on his back, and extends his legs and his hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	After this, I apply three cautery burns from the claw of a hawk, each the size of half a coin, to the entire cauterizing instrument, and two more cautery burns after that on both sides until the figure of the cautery is at three angles, and there should be equal space between them so they are not joined together when they move; and let the cautery be so sharp that it can pierce the two parts of the curved instrument, and let the figure of the cautery be in this form without jostling:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you see that the cautery is too large for the stomach, then cauterize by pinching and holding it above the stomach, and do not move it according to the amount of pain; then cauterize the entire cautery that is called «poins».
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the care of the care that we have had before, as long as they are healthy.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver comes with pain from heat and moisture and great swelling, as long as it is forced out of its natural condition by excess; and the pains are treated as we have said in divisions, and it does not help them much, so it is necessary that the pains be above its height; and a sign of three cauteries according to this form and this figure and this quantity over the liver, under the hypochondres, where the neck of the oxen comes; and there should be space between each cauterization the length of one finger; and let the cautery be as long as the body, and do not press much with the hand all over the cautery; and let it rest only on half the chest, and let the pains be above its feet; and if he cannot, then let him lie down, and extend his legs, and raise his arms; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if you wish to cauterize these cautery knives, if you are skilled and wise in the art, and you guard that you do not burn all the wound, for you would make it harder all the body; and that it does not come up to boiling, for the wounds are very delicate there, and the skillful ones must see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When he has an abscess in the liver, and you know whether it is in the flesh of the liver or in the cloth: if it is in the flesh, he feels the pain not too strong; and if it is in the cloth, he feels severe pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And when this treatment has achieved its purpose, if the hairs on the patient's head are not even; then sign the forehead where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which is similar to a spike, because of this:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize the patient with the cautery until the curd is softened, and comes just to the surface, until the putrefaction is completely gone; after the treatment according to the treatment of wounds until they are healed; and it should only be used by this cautery by those who have studied long in the art of medicine, and by whose hands these diseases have never corrupted.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Therefore, it can be daringly attempted, and it seems to me that it is worth leaving it alone.
dou cautere de pleuresin	fire cauterization
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The old said that one should apply fire cauterization with the roots of aristolochia, and in this manner: take a long root of aristolochia, the longest you can find, and dry it, and as thick and long as your finger; and grind it in oil, and take the cautery into the fire, and cauterize the cautery between the eyebrow and the forehead, and two small cauteries a little down in the part that is outside the beard; and one cautery behind a little, and one above the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two on the side of the back, and one between the shoulder blades; and do not press your hand, but apply it openly as if smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And they said that no one used fire cautery similar to the razor, and they scraped it and put it between the ribs, until it came to the abscess; and the pain was so great, as we have said in the liver abscess.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work, there is fear or the pain kills now, or a fistula comes that cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have said in the divisions of treatment, and it does not improve, then they resort to three methods of cauterization that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	In some cases, you should make three or four cautery marks along the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the liver cauterization we mentioned earlier; and do not press your hand against the entire cautery, and let the hairs be close by on its back; and another method of cauterization is to heat the cautery that has two needles, as we showed in the shoulder dislocation; and lift the curtain that is near the mouse's ear, where the pain from the hairs comes from the right side, and let the elevations you lift the curtain according to its curve, according to the length of the body, and the cautery should be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After boiling the two needles for a while until the tips are perceived from the other side, then remove the caustic, and thus enter into one it will have four. And if you see, then cauterize the entire caustic with three needles.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment when it has gotten gout by being too long, and this is worth mentioning that the other treatments mentioned before should be done.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Caustic is not good for hydropsy, except in the manner which is called "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you treat it according to the methods that we have said in divisions, and your treatment does not benefit, then it is necessary that you make four cauteries around the belly, and one above the stomach, and one above the liver, and one above the spleen, and one behind the back above the spine, and one in the worst place; and let the cauteries be very close to the surface of the skin.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After the fire cauterization, allow it to heal for a long time, and do not neglect the care of the wound after the cauterization; and healing will be hastened, and together with the help of God, the two intentions will be achieved.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the fire cauterization for the abdomen is like the one we have shown before; and for the back, it is like an olive branch, according to what is written above.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the feet are swollen to the one who is hydroptic, and are plain of wounds yellowish, it is necessary that you cauterize above the foot between the auricular and the anular; and lift your hand with the cauterization towards returning.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deeply, thus avoiding the yellowish part, and let the cautery be done in this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After making incisions on both legs with a sharp knife at the tip of each knee; and let the cautery be done from the long, one in front of the groin and the other behind, inside the leg; and leave the cautery for a while to cure the wound that has been made.
de la menoison	of the minimum
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	When the solution of the stomach comes from cold and moisture, as long as the retentive and digestive virtues that are in the stomach and the intestines are blocked, and cannot be cured by other methods; and you see the patient suffering greatly and with great pain, then make a large cautery across the stomach according to what has been said before or a cautery of the stomach, around the cauterizing circle; and four incisions around the subtle belly at all the subtle clavile, and two incisions on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see abundant moisture and the patient is suffering, apply fire cauterization to the fingernail, and I cauterize each yelk, and II small cauterizations over the stomach below the great, for the cure is beneficial when it has good assistance.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the treatment of worms
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When the worms are found in the foundation, or one or more, and are ancient and are large humors cold and moist corrupted, and are treated as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit, then apply cauterizations: III over the spine of the back, which is all before unmedicated little by little in triangulating, and I cauterize outside the belly II doses; and if you think that his stomach is cooled, and the food does not cook, and one sees the face swelling, then the face I apply a large cauterization over the stomach, as it is previously said, and I another over the liver, and I another over the mouse throughout the cauterization clamp; and leave the cauterization open long.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After healing, the limb when it is healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the cartilage that is called "thelul".
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you cut the cartilage, if the fire burns like a razor, and then put it all on top of the cut cartilage; and let your hand go as far as the cauterizer comes to the opening of the vein, from which the blood flows; do this once or twice, and if there is much cartilage, cauterize each part as we have said; afterwards cure the wounds until they are healthy; and if you cauterize with a large fire on top of the cartilage, it will have more help.
de plaie mal curee	of a badly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the wounds cannot be treated by a surgeon or opened up, as we will tell in its place, then the disease comes that cannot be healed except by cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When any fistula comes and is swollen and oozing pus and corrupted moisture, then you should apply a fine tent all over it, and make sure that you remove the tent as much as possible.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After heating the cauterizing iron that seems like a razor, and putting it into the fistula according to the quantity that the tent has entered, and then start the cauterization again until the wounds are cured and corrupted are destroyed, once, or twice, or three times, depending on the amount of damage; and beware of burning the nerves that are in the way, and large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	If the fistula goes to the center of the bladder and the intestine, do not attempt to cure it except in the case where it is immediately visible, and think that it is not healed; after curing the wound as long as it is healthy, and if the wound is open, the matters are removed along with the tension, then wash that the wound is completely healed; and if the matters are not removed, wash that the wound is broken, and corrupt the bone at the source; and thus as one of those that we will say in its wound.
de la maladie des reins	of the kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain in the groin comes to the kidneys, and with great swelling, and does not take on the form of a woman, then it is necessary that you cauterize the kidneys on both sides with the clavile cautery that we have previously mentioned; and if we cauterize them in the middle, there will be three cauterizations in a line, and they will be greater help.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is small and weak from heat and moisture, and it retains urine, then make a cautery in the part in front of the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic region begin, on both sides, and cauterize each one as long as the thorn; and make a cautery in front of the back, or two if you have need; and let the cauteries be in the shape of a cross as previously mentioned.
de la marris	of the marsh
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the marsh is cold and wet, and does not allow conception because of this, and the flowers are corrupted and their term late; and when they come, it causes great pain: therefore it is necessary to make three cauteries around the womb, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries in front of the back; and let the cauteries be in the shape of a cross as we have said.
de la hainche	of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When viscous moisture descends to the groin of the hip, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the muscles of the buttocks are found to be displaced, it is necessary that you cauterize the injury above the groin of the hip with a cautery similar to a circle, and sign before the joint around the groin as it turns, so that the groin is inside the circle; and if it is such a cauterization as those which have been cauterized in the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cauterization is not present, then make three cauterizations of the large olive grove, and let the cauterizations be done as well in front as all the others; and the care until they are healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain of the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the hip joint, and it is from cold and moisture, and the misalignments are cured of what we have said in the division and the treatment does not work, and the disease is ancient: therefore it is necessary that you purge the misalignments of heavy humors with fetid pills, or other good-quality pills similar.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After the cauterization; and the manner of the cauterization is thus: that is to say, together with burning medicines, and fire cauterization.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cauterization is thus in many ways, of which some are: that you cauterize above the hip joint three triangular cauterizations in this form, and do good depth and great, and let there be between each cauterization a space of one finger's breadth, and let the cauterizations be olive-oil; never made on the middle of the hip, because it has four in this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see, the cauterization with the cautery in a circular shape that we have previously mentioned in the dislocation of the shoulder; but do it in a different way so that the circle contains the entire shoulder and all the tendons are burned off.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the way it is done in lithotomy, when the pain remains in the shoulder and does not reach the thigh or the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it comes to the thigh and the leg, then make two cauterizations where the pain is located, and one cautery at the ankle four fingers, on the right side a little; and let the cauterizing knife be sharp, and burn off the tendons; and if the pain spreads to the knee or near it, cauterize where you feel the pain three times or four with the cautery called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	If it is a mechanical job, do more; and if the pain is located between the groin and thigh, perform cauterization with a pointed or circular cauterizer, and be very careful in all your cauterizations that you do not leave the cautery on for too long, burning nerves and large arteries, and causing greater harm and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	I myself have seen many who have cauterized above the ankle bone, and left it on for so long that the leg was completely infected, and the foot as well, and all the bones were corrupted.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a solution of the belly that caused death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in both parts together, perform cauterization on one and the other, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And in the cauterization of the hip, this is the manner: use such a needle and as thick as a navel of a finger, or a little less, and it should be inserted between the bones and inserted from one to the other at a distance equal to the thickness of a thumb; and the needles should be over two parts, and also like this:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it should be heated until it is all red and the senseless ones are thrown away, and then place it on the bone of the misaligned hip, and turn it over to the healthy side; and the cauterization once with the cautery and leave it for three days; and then apply a poultice of butter, and leave the wound open for ten days; after the healing of the bandage until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasis says that we use this cautery little because of its fearsome appearance, and few see those who use it; nevertheless, it is a good cauterizer, which can bear the pain, and where it is applied.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The cauterizing instruments of medicine are such that you make a tool with prongs at the edge of the door, and it is either made of brass or iron at one end, and at the top, there should be II of us, and between each prong, there should be the quantity of the groove of a knife; and they should be open below and above, and joined together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After placing the board on the patient's back lying on their side, and quickly placing your hand on the board of the back; after pouring between the two circles of the hot water that is heated by the fire one pint, and let it for an hour, and suffer the pain of the heat and burn.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is true that the pain is as great as from fire; and when the burns have passed, lift your hand with the instrument and raise the back gently, and leave it for three hours, and put butter until the black skin is removed; and let it for three hours to cool; and this would be the last aid after the treatment of wounds until they are healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	If the pain has spread to the thigh or leg, use the instrument that you have used in the groin, according to what you have done; and this is the method of hot treatment, and I have written it where treating the correction of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take as much alkaline and fresh chalk, as much of one as the other, and grind them together, and put them in a new jar.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	or he has a small hole where the point of a razor can enter; and put that in the other jar well ground, and put above alkaline and chalk and sweet water until it has the two above the powders you will have well ground in your hand; and let it stand until all the water drips out or the jar is ground, then take all the powder and pour it over chalk and over alkaline as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And if it is very painful and administered in the form of medical work and cauteries for other members because it does the same work as fire, and if it is other medicines that are well cauterized for the back in this way and with anacardium and chalk with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	Galen tells us of a cure in which some were cured of the pain in the back and sciatica, and they were very much improved, and said that no other cure was made, and that they were healed once when this cure was made, and he bathed himself as he teaches afterwards.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And in this way, you should apply a fresh, green, and dry litargire, and grind it well with a little grease, and put it on the hip and thigh and leg where the pain is, and bind it; and leave it for three hours, as much as the hairs do not feel the burning.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	Then make him enter a warm bath until the body is slightly heated, and then make him enter bed, and the pain will go away entirely and be cured.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And it should be noted that no one should use such cautery or medicines unless after the evacuation of blood.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with lead from a goose, it helps a lot; and it should be done in this way by the cauterizers.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take linen and pour old oil on it, and place it on the sinus that is between the thumb and the other one called the foscile.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	After taking some lead from a goose, and heating it in the fire until it becomes charcoal, and placing it on the linen, and leaving it until it is soaked; and doing this again, and not stopping doing this until you think that it is reaching the back, and that the pain has ceased; and this method of cauterization is called «cautere de chievre».
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain of two days
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or from impact or from too great evacuation, or from similar spread cold matter, none of these remedies is as good as fire cauterization, because it is from hot infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary after the pain that the hairs are pricked with fetid pills or other similar things, which are placed on top of the back, where the pain is, three lines deep, and in each line five cauteries or more according to the virtue and quantity that the hairs can bear; and let the cauteries be done according to the cauterizer called «poins»; and if you see, make three or four at the middle cauterizer in this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This disease often comes to small children, and the signs of onset are that they have a stiff neck when moving, and fear; and you feel in the last spinous process of the back and in us the appearance that comes above the other spinous processes.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you want to treat it, if you cauterize with the fire cautery according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	If the fire cautery penetrates every part of the spine.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, then cauterize around the spine with the fire cautery touching two or three lines, and they are close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After treatment, the patient should be kept healthy according to what we have said, and you should not apply cauterization in a place where there is a swelling of the nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When pain in the joints is due to moisture that spreads to each limb of the body, and when pain comes suddenly, which is properly called "gout", and when it is caused by cold and medicines cannot cure it, then it should be treated with cauterization in this manner: apply a lot of cauterization around the joint, and let the cauterizing oil be used in this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is a need to prick the face with a needle, then apply the entire cauterization that is called "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come from the joints and other joints, and this often happens, then apply cauterization to each joint with three or four needles of each part, throughout the entire cauterization; and if you have more skill, do so, but do not hold your hand too far away until the pain of the patient is relieved.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the joints and back, then administer the cauterization that we have mentioned in this chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are severe, apply a bandage two fingers wide; and if they do not remain, apply a bandage over each joint and over the hair of the hand; and if the pains come from the wrists or shoulders, cauterize each part, and give good management to the patient and proper medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you give good management and purify the blood, it will be healed with the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	of the breaking of the nose
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When the break comes in anger, and the blood flows down to the knees and this is new, if you see it when it happens, do not move it that day; and use things that make the stomach heavy, so that the blood does not flow out of its belly; afterwards, let him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to tilt his head as long as the bleeding is not stopped, and then press them down to his side, and sign over the break above the bone of the wrist, and at all a sign that is similar to half a circle above the body; then heat the cauterizing iron in this way:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	until it is white and it sweats scents.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then remove the mud from the joint; and the ministers tie a cloth over their hands so they do not return; and work well on the thighs at the wound, and put some ointment and some salt on his thighs, and the other on the worst hand that stains the hands; then put the cautery on the sign all over your hand, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, start again with another one until you reach the bone; and be careful that the mud does not come out when you are doing the cautery; that you do not burn it; and that by this way the wounds do not die, or other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And if you do not come to the bone with the fire cautery, your work is worthless.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is necessary that the cauterizer for children be done subtly according to their size, and for large people also according to their size; after three days, care for the leg of the fire cautery until the burn is healed; then care for other wounds until it is healthy, and gently rub the bad parts 40 times on its back until the wound is well healed; and it is necessary that its dislocations be stretched long, so that the blisters do not rise when they try to go into rooms.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	After forty days, when he wishes to get up, let him be given a well-made bandage, and let it remain for another forty days; and let him have good rest, so that he does not work too much and avoid too much repletion from drinking and eating, and too high breathing; and if he follows this instruction, he will be completely healthy.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say here after the cure of cutting into his chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the tearing of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When tears come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow any more, let him have the fire cautery according to its quantity, and let the third part of the cure be applied; after the cure according to what we have said; and none of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized with the cautery at three angles in this form.
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but the first sign is the shoulder blade protruding and make a line across the width of the tear, and another one below, and hold your hand at all the cauterizing iron.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauteries are lighter and less painful.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes in any limb, or to collapse or to pierce, and this pain lasts long, and the medical cure does not help, then it must be cauterized with the cauterizing iron called «poins», and the cauteries should be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and its virtue and its location of twists and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If it is healthy enough for the first cautery, it is good; if not, begin another cautery above that one, as it is often customary to let it die to the member that is closest, because it is necessary that you do the cauteries until the hairs are healthy.
de meselerie	to treat wounds
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	Wounds are never treated with cauterization without great help, and at the same time, the disease that comes from the putrefaction of pus and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	If you see that the wound is being cauterized, take care if the disease is at the beginning, and if it has been cured according to what we have said in the previous section, and does not deteriorate or remain, and you doubt that the corruption will not spread throughout the wound, then make the following cauterizations: I apply the cauterization to the head towards the front; and the other to the forehead at the end of the eyebrows; and II on the two corners, and I behind the temple; and leave as much space as the cauterization comes close to the bone, and until the scabs fall off so that the vapors of large humors can escape; and cauterize again according to what is in front.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules; et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	If the fracture is scattered everywhere; and it is obviously present, so you must cauterize with these cauteries that we have said or chief, and the cauterant in the middle of the nose, and two cauterants above the spine of the neck, and six cauterants above the spine of the back, and one great one on each side of the buttocks and one other below, and two above the shoulders, and two above the elbows, and two above the knees, and one above each joint of the hands and feet, and above the wounds of the hands; and beware of the nerves that are above the calcaneum, that you do not burn them; and never make any cauterant above the bone of the little finger, and one above the bone of the stomach, and one above the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And the more you perform cauterization, the less help it provides; and the more it benefits, and the less painful it is for the patient as healthy people experience, because the body is already corrupt.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	It is necessary that the cauterization be large and small according to the members and joints, as you will find in the ways of iron.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After treating the limb with flour multiple times with honey and other treatments until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When inflammation comes to any member and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and it is not healed, then perform cauterization on the member according to its size and smallness; and let the cauterization go slightly into the skin; then treat the wounds until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And never cauterize by hand, at the palm, or at the back, of the nerve that moves the limb, thus it becomes stiff and inflamed; and otherwise, no one should meddle with it unless they are knowledgeable about the limbs and their movements.
de albaras	And never cauterize by hand, at the
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the disease called "albaras" is awakened, and medical treatment is of no avail, then cauterize with a cautery a little in front, according to the amount of the cure's courage, until the flesh is stiffened and turned its color; then treat with flour of wheat and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and salt of colon and salt of almond, each a part; and mix all together, and apply to the affected area, and bandage with a cloth, and keep it on the body until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of chancre by cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When chancre appears at the beginning, and you see it stop spreading, if you cauterize it with a cauterizing iron that seems to be in the shape of a circle, all around the edge of the chancre.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And all the sages say that one should also make a cauterization in the middle of the chancre; and I do not think this is good, because I believe it will not be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have seen this happen only once; and the better thing is that it be cauterized around, with the cauterizing iron that is called «circle», as we have said in many cauterizations.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the inflamed part that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When anyone has a disease called "adubelati", and it lingers in dying due to the excess it causes or because of the old age when they are too old, and they have little blood, or because of the tension; then you see it hastening to die: therefore cauterize around with many small cautery needles, pricking; afterwards leave it thus.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it pierced by the whole cautery, then heat the cautery with which this is shaped.
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the middle of this disease called "adubelati" until the cauteries have pierced through, and be such cauteries that the hairs feel afterwards in a similar manner as the course of the pustule is alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment until they are completely healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	The treatment of fire by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another way of disease is called "corrodens", and it is nothing but a piece of member, for it bends the members as if the dry reeds did.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in the limb that can suffer cauterization together with fire, then heat the cauteries with a very small and great flame, according to what is necessary for the limb or the disease; after cauterizing all parts until you reach all the corruption, and nothing remains of it, so that everything that is corrupted is removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	Then leave it for three days, and apply a cauterized cloth on the wounds, suffering with oil until the scars of the fire are removed, and all corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment of wounds, burns arise.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if you see after three days that healthy burns do not arise, it is good; but if not, then reapply the cauterization on the remaining wounds.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this method has never been treated with medicine in place of fire cauterization; but nonetheless, fire cauterization is of greater help, and I have already mentioned the cure of medicine ague in the division: take it when you have the opportunity.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of peas that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times, it comes to the feet through defecation, and a disease arises that is called "clos" according to our understanding, and it is a great thing that becomes large in the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauteries of this disease are according to two methods.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	It is to say, fire cauterization, and water cauterization with hot iron.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Fire cauterization is that you heat the cauterization as if it were a pen of feather, and it is made of good iron at the measure that it can penetrate the nail on all parts, and that it has thin edges; afterwards, put it all hot above the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until it comes to the end of the nail; and leave it in this way for three days until it begins to rot; then make an ointment of wild herbs ground with silk, and leave the ointment all night, and the nail will fall off and be pulled out by its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the joint with heat, applying hot poultices until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are converted by previous injuries to the body, and often in the hands and feet, then it is necessary to apply cauterization with very hot iron; and it is done in this way: take a needle of iron or steel, or a pen of vulture, and place it on the nail and the cuticle, that is, the dead skin; then place the needle on so that it pierces all around, then put a drop of very hot water, and hold your hand tightly, and press your hand in turning so that the edge of the needle reaches the root of the nail, and find the very hot water deep to the root; and let the patient feel the pain of the very hot water for an hour; then leave it like this, and it will fall off at all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Do another one after that, until you have relieved all those that are in the chest, then treat the wounds that engender fire.
li cure dou trembler	the treatment of the tremor
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee; et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When anyone trembles from cold or from intermittent fever or other, it is necessary that you make four cautery burns or four above the spine of the back, one cautery between each spine; and one cautery on the chest, and one above the stomach at the cautery oil; it will leave the trembling, and hasten the healing of the disease.
des pustules puans	of pus-filled pimples
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	No times appear from before the body is bathed, or pustules arise, which come from large corrupted matters.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	If it is necessary when they appear that one make a fire cauterization above each head of the pustule: a subtle fire cautery of birch wood, of which the point should be grasped in the fire, or of the root of aristolochia long, or with the lenticular cauterization.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And no times cauterize at the beginning when they appear, in this manner, and it cannot grow new ones, but is broken down the excess from which they come, and are healed; but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there is great loss of blood from the cut artery at the wound that comes from the surrounding area, or from the incision of the abscess, or from the cauterization of the member, and similar things; and it is a very painful thing to stop.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And whenever this happens to anyone, quickly place your finger on the wound of the vein, and press it very tightly until the bleeding is stopped from your finger, and no more blood comes out; then heat up the cauterizing irons in oil several times as large or small as they are all red; then take I, or great or small according to the wound and the limb where the artery is located, and put the cauterizing iron on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cauterizing iron until the bleeding is stopped.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if you lift the other end of the vein quickly, and the cauterizer is extinguished, then take the other cauterizers that are at the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not stop doing this one after the other until the blood is stopped; and be careful not to burn the nerve that is next to it, and that no other harm comes to the wound; and watch that when the artery is cut, if it cannot be stopped immediately when the artery is large, it must be done in one of the four ways we have mentioned: by cauterizing, or by extracting it when it is not yet treated, or by a strong thread, or by medicines placed on top that have the power to stop bleeding; and let it be tied and held tightly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever administers the tightening of ropes or other things burning above, or similar things, does not profit unless they do not.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone and they have no present remedy, they should put their finger index above the wound of the vein as we have said, and well tighten until it is tightened above the wound and above the vein; and they should not move it, but keep it cold often until it is frozen and swollen and tightened; and make inquiries in advance about what they have to do with cauteries and remedies.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of remedies for tailors
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter all diseases for which it is necessary to cauterize with fire, or with a burning medicine, and the symptoms and causes and instruments and forms of cauteries; and I will put this chapter of the shoulder joint from head to foot, and I will go through this same way in order to find more easily what we want.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And therefore when I begin this chapter, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and for this reason it requires greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you not to undertake foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many ways of people come in cures.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	If they come from such people who are so with their disease that they die immediately because of the harm they find in their disease, and the greatness of its wickedness; and of these one should have fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And of these, there are those who give you their sense, and say: "Wait, I am ready"; and the disease is spiteful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It is not enough that you allow those who come to you who have this way, but put more caution in your honor than in your desire, and do not open rashly but wisely of what you are certain, and what you have taken and lost; and use prediction and indication in the treatment of your diseases for health to be converted; and this will help you to acquire good reputation, glory, and memory for long.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, Our Lords grant you good understanding and truth, and if you wish to breathe from the holy inspiration of her hand, indeed.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	I have ordered you to read this chapter by comparing it with other chapters on cauteries, as I have explained from the beginning to the end, so that you can find out more easily what you will need to do.
dou chief plein d’aigue	full of sharp
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	This disease often occurs in children when they are born, and when the child's head is held too tightly; and sometimes it comes because of a sudden movement that cannot be prevented.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	I have never seen this disease except in children, and to all those I have seen it has been fatal; and therefore it seems to me that it is better to avoid this work in treating them.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw a child who was suffering from a sharp pain, and the head was swelling each day until it could not bear it; and he thought so much of the moisture that he died, and this moisture is gathered outside the bone above the shoulder joint, between the neck and the bone; and the remedies are such that if the moisture is between the neck and the bone, and the abscesses are small, you should make a wide cut into the head; and it should be as long as our thumb, so that the moisture flows out; and take this shape of the sponge:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more severe, and the abscess is larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is outside the bone, and the signs you see are the commissures of the joint open on each part, and the sharp pain when you press with your hand inside, and it has not been relieved: then you must make three incisions in the joint according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, drain all the moisture out.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After closing the incisions with dressings and powders, and put wine and oil on it, and let it rest for five days; then remove the dressing, and cure the wound with poultices and counter-irritants, and keep the joint immobilized, and gradually reduce the moisture by drying the meat with a little moisture until the limb is comfortable and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is that you look for the opening of the abscess, and the gathering of the sharp point; for it is never in front, never behind, never on the right, and never on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Then cut where the abscess is open, and fill it with the sharp point, and make the incision according to what you can do; and be careful not to cover the artery; and if blood flows, then the wound may die due to the flow of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	return
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When it happens to someone with a disease called "cataract" in the eyes or the pupil, and the disease is ancient, and the medical cure does not help much, then the treatment is cauterization with what is used to cover the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	It is therefore necessary, when you see the hairs covering, that the hairs make their head; after that, he rubs the shoulder with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then he holds the hairs back against the cloth; then look where the blood comes out, and the veins on both sides are near the ears, and they are not replaced; then sign the veins of the cheek, then cover both with a piece of cloth of two parts, until the wound comes just to the bone, and it should be through the width of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see, push the piece of cloth away from the artery and cover it above, cutting in the same way as it should be across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, the blood should flow continuously from it.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open when pricked, it is necessary to measure the quantity of the space of three fingers, then make an incision down to the bone; and what amount of sinew is needed to put out, is six centimeters, and perhaps a little more or less, depending on how much pain the patient can bear, and the replenishment of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains above the bone pointedly, if the pus that has been removed does not come back, then strain the wound and tie it, and the treatment of the ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	de emigrainne
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When ancient emigrainne comes, and the cataract is active, due to the moisture of tears and the chills in the forehead and old age and similar things, and it is treated with methods of medical cures and nothing seems to help, then we should cauterize the arteries of the forehead, as we have told.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of their extraction is that the hairs of his temples are made to stand up, and one listens to the artery that opens in the forehead, because it opens well by its beating, and it is pounded only in some people who are too fat; and if it is pounded, then one strains the skin with some cloths, then rubs the skin with some rough cloth, and raises the skin with hot water until the artery opens clearly; then take the spatula of which this is formed:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	then slightly scrape the thin skin until you reach the artery, then cut it upwards with pincers, and remove all the threads that are stuck to each part; and if the artery is very thin, turn it back to the tip of the needle, then cover that part according to the amount of the two chapters.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not covered, it will not heal completely.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And draw out the blood from the sixth vein, just to the third; and if the artery is large, it is necessary to tie it in two places with a strong silk thread, which does not allow any blood to come before the healing of the wound, and prevent the formation of pus; then cover the excess between the two knots in the same hour, and then, if you see, cauterize the wound with the cautery knife up to the bone until the chapters are covered; and this is the final work, if the wounds do not have fever and he is of hot constitution.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the fire cautery, it is helpful to finish the moistures: because it is the greatest help for moistures.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	For the extraction of arteries, it is necessary to fill the wound with old cotton and place dry bandages on top; and when they are removed, care must be taken with dry medicines that produce heat and bandages, as long as they are clean; and if there is no copper present, you should apply the wound with vinegar and the bandage to your hand that the wound is not stuck; and if you do not have this present, you should apply ice to the wound until it is frozen, and raise the wound with cold water until it is clean, and hold it as it should be; and what is more difficult and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this cautery cutting from II parts, but the cuts should be well spaced to last longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	When instruments are too tight, they hold less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus; et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it should have between the two knives a gap of large space, and then when you have marked the two lines, and you melt the hot iron above as far as it comes near to the bone, and cover the vein in two lines; and they should be separated between the two cuts because there is no safeguard from this cauterization altogether; and this is the form of the cauterization:
des larmes	of tears.
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes are descending from veins that are above the testicle of the head, and it does not profit much from medical care, and you see the face of the evil becoming twisted, and feeling as if trembling; and they are held and moist so that the hairs of the papers are soaked, and the papers are stained, and scorched by the heat of the tears, if there is a need for this care.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And they called the old "wound healer," and you should make three cuts or front evenly according to the length of the front; and one of the cuts as two completely in the front by lifting up and down just above the neck, and the others two on each side of the ribs, and be careful not to cut the arteries that are on each side of the ribs; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the two jaws, and for each wound the quantity of three drops through the joints; and have prepared a piece of sponge and much cloth to soak up the blood, then suck the wound with the mouth in two parts of which this is the shape:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the incision that is to be made from the temple just above the second incision; and scrape off everything that is between the two cuts up to the entire face which is above the bone, then make another part of the same incision just above the other second, and then extract this spatula.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If you put the instrument called "curette" into the first cut, it is very sharp on one side, and on the other side is soft, not very sharp, and this is its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And put the sharp edge of the instrument towards the surface of the bone, and the soft edge towards the bone, and the cut as far as it comes to the other cut.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cover all the vessels that descend from the head as far as the eyes until the incision is continuous up to the point where the curd opens, and then do the other side in the same way on the other side; and then extract the pus equally, and express the wound for the pus taken; then put in each incision a piece of old cotton, and put on bandages moistened in wine and oil and vinegar, and make sure that abscesses do not come; and the patient should apply a large amount of salt on the wound, then the care of basilicon with rose oil, and other remedies that are used to cure wounds, until they are healed.
dou reume des eulz	return of the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When any come to have the fire cautery as usual, and you see the eyes tight and small, and weakened in sight, and the papers burned; and the hairs are shaved, and where the shaving is done there is pain, and the hairs are blocked; then by these accidents those matters and that fire do not come from a single vein, and the cure that is, if this is so.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And it is that you command the patient to turn his head back, then make a great cut across the forehead, and another one wide at the top of the nose.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And it begins from the wound of the right temple to the left temple, and let the incision just touch the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move in the mouth; and when the bone is exposed, suck out all the blood onto a sponge, then clean between the two lips of the wound and put old cotton, and linen; then bind it with moistened cloths in wine and oil, and guard against pus forming; when it is taken out, it is necessary to rub the bone until charcoal begins to appear, then treat the things that are used to draw out charcoal.
En teil maniere: pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In such a manner: take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of collophane, and make an ointment; and apply it to these wounds to inject charcoal throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the deafness of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that which pierces into the ears is one of the four things: either grains or bone or stone or similar thing like iron; or seeds, such as beans, peas; or something flowing such as water and oils and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it pierces into the ear or in another way of thing that does not fit well in the ear, it does not grow in the ear, so put the ear to the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see an arrow, if any drops of purple oil or hemp oil are distilled, then apply extraction; and the effect is to make him spit out the condition, and stop his nose when he sneezes, and put pieces of cloth or wool around his ear; and place the ear upwards.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Many times it comes out by this treatment; and if it does not come out, apply extraction with fine pricks, of which this is the form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it comes out by the fine pricks, that is good; if not, apply extraction with a thin needle; and if it does not come out by this, make a tube of rain and blow into the head of the tube or the hole of the ear very hard so that nothing can enter with the tube; then pull it out properly, for many times it comes out as we have said; and if it does not come out in this way, take some thread and wrap it around the ears, and put any instrument that is sharp for this purpose, and put a piece of cotton inside; then press the thread on the arrow or whatever it is, and pull it out.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If she does not jump from all these things that we have said, then quickly pierce the ear as soon as an abscess forms and bleeds, and spasms; and the manner of the piercing is that you first make a small incision into the painful part of the ear, and extract the pus according to its strength, then place the pus between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear where the grease hangs; and let the incision be as if it were a crescent moon, until you reach the bone, then remove it according to your ability, and suck vigorously into your mouth; and the cure until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is small and swollen, administer extraction; and if it cannot exit, then administer the following subtle form of spatula:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and administer an incision of that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not make a mistake in thinking that the grains are moist due to earwax, until you have made many pieces; then extract with delicate forceps and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction is aligned.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the case of something lodging in the ear, it is recommended that the hairs be blown out first with a conditioner, and then cleanse the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let it lie flat on the ear itself or where the sharp is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it jumps up for heaven's sake, that's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If not, take many stones according to the length of your finger and light ones, and heat them in the fire; and put the hairs one or two at a time into the ear, and step on the other part of your foot, and strike with another stone above the stone that is in the ear; and do not cease to do this stone after stone until the sharp is all out, and thus it jumps out all out; and if you see, take the splint, and boil one of the stones in the ear, and the other stone take from the fire as long as the thickest splint is ready; then make the other splints as before.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the animal, if it is of small size, such as a mouse and similar things, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is of large size that one can feel, then ameliorate the extraction of pincers; and this is the lightest thing to remove that is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	When extracting worms from the ears, if you treat it as we have said in the division and if you treat distillations, and the treatment does not help, then it is necessary to look at the ear in the sunlight: if there are no worms, then remove them with fine pincers, and if there are none, take the cauterizing iron of which this is the form:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And it is narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And the most subtle sharpness in the ear according to the amount of pain, then it often goes all over the body; do this frequently until everything is visible.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not obey to go out, then dull the pain around the body as I have said in the stone; and if they cannot bear it as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have discovered in the treatment of wounds, and you will find them where treating distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines in the ear with this instrument, then the form is as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And if it is of silver or lead, poke them out of the small pores and above with a spout; and to press within the distillation, use a well-made instrument of lead for this purpose, and if you see the razor and wrap it around the point evenly with cotton; then pour your oil or juice, and whatever medicine you see in the can, and the can should be in the ear; then press through the razor all the cotton, and press your hand temperately until the oil is distilled or slowly from the ear; and the smell of the medicine inside, and it should be the distillations are slightly heated on the fire as when it is distilled in the ear; and be careful that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of ear deafness
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without some deafness in their ears; and this same thing happens to men by ear deafness, or by a bone inside the ear, and this deafness never comes from anything inside the ear, if one cannot see it; and it always comes from something outside the ear, and one sees it well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	That deafness which comes from something inside the ear, if one cannot see it, is due to great inflammation in many positions, and in this one, where one sees, one must put the ear on a bad side towards the sun; and look inside: if you see the opacity throughout this space of which this is the form:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And let the hot iron move back and forth over the entire surface, so that it does not burn the ear; if the opilation is of charcoal or horsehair, then hold it with fine pincers, and the copper gently, until that charcoal is completely burned.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the opilation is placed inside the ear, then take a fine razor and slightly heat it over the fire, then put it on the horsehair of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the opilation that causes the patient to feel gritty in the ear, slightly cut, and make sure not to damage the nerves of the ear; then put in the ear a tent according to the width of the pustule, and moisten it with Egyptian honey.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do not use the joint for any activity until the wound is healed, or take a tent and moisten it with strong rose water, and powder it with broken glass; and if you see inflammation in the ear, it is advisable to remove the tent and apply another one made of rose oil and wax, until the inflammation is removed; then cure it until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding occurs, soak an sponge and apply cold cloths on the ear, and use other treatments that remove the bleeding of blood which are used to treat distillations.
de la char des papieres	of the paper of the book
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This is the process of drying the bones that come from paper when they are wet and are dry, if it is necessary to stretch them with tongs and pincers, and the root of a spatula from its roots; then place on the bone vitreous glue.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if without removing them, the cauterizer with the subtle lens-shaped fire, and the cauterizer after the incision is good; and often they repair, but nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	of the powder
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Frequently arrive in papers certain things that seem grainy in their form and hardness, and because of this disease is called "hail", and it is an assembly of moisture large on the paper above and below; the workings are such: if the hail moves from one side to another, and it is a light thing to know; then make it wide, then scrape each part slightly, then take it with pincers, and the cope.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you do not cover it with a slight perforation in the paper, it does not hurt the patient; and if the force is great, it assembles at a seam, and the cure until it is healthy; and if it is small, do not make any force, because the wounds restore quickly and inflame.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	If the sharp bone is falling downwards into the depths of the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper, and place the sharp bone in some forceps, and hold it with a cloth and press from both sides; and if the paper is moved by incision, it does not hurt anything; and when the sharp bone is cut off, pour some oil of strong salt on the wound, and heal the limb as soon as possible until the painful parts are healed.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Exinach is a grease that is squeezed out of the threads of paper above, and it has more in children than in adults, and it hurts their eyes much, and they vomit it in the morning, and they cannot look at the light of the sun because their tears stick to their eyes; and for this reason they lie on their faces and sleep on their sides, and their papers are outside their heads moist with the exinach that has puffed up and covered them.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the joint to your touch and feel the extrusion between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the way of the work is such that the hairs put their head in your hand; and then take a cloth of linen, and make a tent in the shape of a circle according to the amount that contains extrusion from each part, then place it on top of it; and press from one side and the other, so that the extrusion is assembled within the circle; then make a small cut in the middle of the moisture at the sharp spatula, and not more than the size of the wound on the vein; and make the skin even until you come to the extrusion; and in many positions of the extrusion from the cut, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Extract the whole piece of cloth that is between your two hands, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is spread out; and be careful not to insert into the wound, that you do not come to all the oil just above the skin, that you do not damage it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if it does not open at the beginning of the wound, gently rub the wound until it opens; then extract it as we have said, then wipe cloths in hot and cold water, and put on the limb, and bandage well.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such men who break the cloth and put it on to corrupt the remaining moisture.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the healer until he is healthy.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it comes to the body with an abscess that is open, then the healer applies wet dressings until he is healthy.
des poilz des papieres	of hairs of papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc IIII manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When in papers hairs are born that are not natural, and are awakened, if they harm the eyes, and bring on diseases such as tears accustomed and softening of the papers and whiteness, until it is the cause of the destruction of the eyes; and the cure is in four ways: either by cauterization with fire, or by medicine wet, according to what is before or chapter of cauterization, and is done either by incision and sewing or by needles, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you place the head of the badly positioned part in your hand, then return the paper of oil to your right hand; if it is converted, it is good; if not, if there is an needle at the end of the thread; and so it is on the other side of the paper, over the hairs that grow from these hairs, and pull the thread above the paper, and return it to the razor; then in the part outside the paper, outside the hairs adjusted, all the skin painted, from the great leg to the small one; then pull the thread, and place on the paper a small tent of cotton and linen, then above the paper a figure of an envelope, like the fuller's mallet, and in all cases it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you saw lifted the paper that is divided into all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if it is a matter of someone who has skill in coping with great quantities of paper according to the way the paper is softened; then make all the space above the two lines that you have marked, and beginning at the large arm from great to small; and let one of the slits near the hairs in the growth of a root, then squeeze the thread into one of the two angles of the needle, then scrape off the skin; then bring together the two lips to a seam of an needle at all the thread of fine silk, and wipe the blood, and make the excess hair above the two edges to any things gluing, if you see to do this; and if not, if you have no care, then leave the seam and the threads for three or four days; then treat the wound without sewn things, dry and constricting, because the paper re-lives at the moment of the wound and its assembly, but the seam is dried (as they said the ancients), and it is work without fear; and if in another way: and that you sign the paper in a shape that is as alike to the form of the mirror, at three threads according to the form that is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then apply heat evenly according to the shape that is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you cannot hold the needles, and the thing is not even, take a needle or there is a thread, and put it in the shape; and put the other thread over the big arm, and the second thread over the small one, and assemble the threads evenly between your fingers; then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin where you have marked, as we have told, then assemble the two lips of the wound by sewing, and cure it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerote and similar soothing ointments; and never once has the hair of the paper been converted: so you must use what we have said about the incision; but the sewing in one and the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The care of the dogs is as follows: and it is that you convert the paper and the thread inside according to what I have said, and then make two dogs by art, and two subtle links as long as the paper and the breadth of the oil is; and cope with the two parts where you hold the threads; then assemble the one and the other subtly above what covers the paper of the oil, and strain the two dogs from the two parts formed; and leave it thus for some time, and the skin that was stretched will die and rot and putrefy, until it falls off through it.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it lingers, if the copper has strong forces, then cure it until it is healed; and when the wound has been dressed, and if the paper has been lifted, and the hairs will no longer grow; and this is the form of the two cups that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The work is such that you grasp a thin needle, and pull the silk thread softly and thinly; then assemble the hairs and both subtly, and let the length of the threads be one palm long; then order the other thin silk thread briefly, and do not twist the other thread; then put the hairs on your skin so that the work is shaded, for this is a delicate and small work, then pull the needle through the entire work at the root of the pricked hair, and push it through the paper gently until you remove it from the natural hair; then pull the hair up to the work, and push in the work that hair, if there is one or two or three or more; then pull your hand so that the hairs come out of the entire work with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the bone is treated and the hairs do not come off with it, then you should treat the bone with the fat that you have ordered, as long as the bone is still fresh and you can see it through the oil; then you should apply the fat and leave it for two or three days, until the hair grows back in its place and the flesh grows on top of it. And if the hairs are small, then accompany them with a long hair from a goat's tail, and raise it with the other one until it is lengthened and then let it go.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the appearance of the oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease, which is called "aleacrati" or the "gout", comes into the oil, there are two methods: one natural and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it occurs by injury of wound, or by cutting or cauterization, and by similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the method of treatment in this is that you break that suture, and dry the lips of it, and put in tents of linen, and bind it until it is healed; and you should only use in its care things that dry and constrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, the disease becomes worse than before; but in the work of things that are softening, such as fenugreek; and the root of a sharp or high plant and seed of linseed should be cooked, and an ointment of turpentine founded in any of the oils, and there is wrapped in a tent, and the care of this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasures of your knowledge are that you take care that it does not decay according to its former form; and this work that we have said is only a preliminary to this disease, that it does not return according to its former form.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the oil that comes in the jar
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease that is truly called "axiocratic", and is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accident comes from wounds and cuts and cauterization and similar things; and the method of this work is that you hold an needle, in which it has a double thread, and the thread in the jar, and you make it pierce from the right arm to the left, so that the thread comes out of both the holes of the jar; then the jar is placed above the entire needle, and the cloth wide.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the paper fits according to what it should be, it's good; if not, take the razor and put it in the groove, and turn the paper, and make two cuts or at the edges of the incision you have made; and let the corners of the two cuts be such that when they are assembled, the shape is as much like the shape of a letter that has not «I greek»; then remove that char, according to the amount that its cost is away from, what the paper means, then add the two missing parts, and the cure of what we have said about softening medicines, and tents, until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	If the illness comes from a cut or stitch or cauterization, it is necessary to make a plain cut outside of the hairs and papers, according to what has been said before; then squeeze between the two leathers of a tent, as I have said; and one must do the work according to the form of the disease, for it is very different in form, and the wise masters apply various means to help bring back the figure to its natural shape; and the patients themselves, according to what is needed of work and instruments in many ways.
dou soudement de la papiere	doubtfully of the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this suture is done by many people in a certain way that the paper above is smeared with the white of oil, and cannot move or do its work naturally, then you should go outside the paper with the point of a razor, and lift it up; and extend it with pincers, until you remove what is hard at the subtle spatula, which should not be too sharp or too thin, so that the hairs cannot suffer that the spatula is too sharp or blinds the oil; and let your incision, from which you scrape that assembly, lightly, so that the paper regains its natural form; and that whole assembly is healthy, and nothing is ever put in hot salty oil, and lifted with sweet water, and with colloidal; then put between the paper and the oil a linen cloth, and put above the oil moistened woolen cloth in abundance of honey; and after the job use colloidal and other things until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the elbow of the oil
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	There are two ways the elbow can be: one is nervous and resembles a hard, dry face, and another that is not nervous but resembles frozen white moisture, as when one touches it with iron and heats it with pincers, it cannot be; and both begin near the large arm and grow little by little until they cover the whole eye and all light and movement of the oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of incision is that the hairs put their head in your hand, then work the eyes; and take the elbow to your hand, then bend the elbow with pincers of small double, and hold it above; then take a needle, and put the hair of a horse, or a cow, or a cow, and the thread strong; and double the point of the needle a little and push it into the elbow, and push the needle through all the needle, and tie the elbow with a thread and hold it above, and scrape all the hair on the side of the elbow that shows the pearl and the silk to the hair just under the head, then cut the remaining at the root of the arm to all the subtle spatula and with small forces, and leave the natural skin or the arm, so that by the incision does not come the usual tears; and once it was held only on the elbow alone, and the thread, as we have said; then scrape on all the soft spatula of which this is the form:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be careful that the spatula does not touch the charred flesh and break it, and that the prunelle is not pierced; and after the incision pour a small amount of broken silk oil, and make a poultice with litargire, and leave it on the other side; then treat the wound as necessary until it heals.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the joint is not nervous, and you cannot insert the needle, and the prunelle cannot enter, often this resemblance of a joint of medicines is cured; and they are born as I have told in the division, and if you see it covered, then work the oil of the evil, and take the spatula lightly with a small amount of agitated silk according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And gently rub the angle of the elbow above, and if you see that it does not soften and the skin is close, then drip from your mouth into the oil collier made of lavender and red oil and worn-out silk, and extinguish the oil on the other side; then continue the other work according to this same method, until it is completely healed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary in the oil, such as an abscess, then milk, and first cure the abscess until it is healed, then continue the work as before, until it is completely healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh on the arm is black at night due to great harm, then soak it in oil until the evening, and apply a part of it and not all at once, as tears do not come; then pour in red wine colloid which is made of litargire.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the hair that grows above the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Some men's hair grows red once in their life, and covers the pupil and stays on the papers and turns to the defense, and it seems like a balcony of balauste; and the work is that the hairs put their head in your hand, then work the eulz, and hold all that hair with suitable nails to this, and support it with force; then cover the first hair, and go all scraping to the razor just at the end, and be careful not to bleed the oil at the work; and let the incision of the spanish fly that we have said in the incision of the nail and as small forces of which we take the base, so that the form after this chapter demonstrates; and when the incision is accomplished and all the hair is taken, then use the oil of silk bruised or you distill red wine colloid and similar corrosive medicines, and put on top of the oil with cotton with a little wool, so that it is assured of abscess healing; and if nothing remains, and the swelling goes away, and you doubt abscess healing, then leave the oil and cure the abscess with calming abscess healing; then return to your work until it is healthy, and thus make all hairs are treated in the oil by this similarity.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But it is necessary that you support the care of every weakness of the natural way; and of the accidental way, in the work of iron; and not put your hand in any of these works until you see that this member is suffering from that work.
des voines des eulz	of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	are red veins that are covered over the eye, and take away from the view their work and weaken the eye always.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	The work is therefore to the first that you look at this eye, in which those are, and outside, and there is no other disease besides that; therefore, the work in this way: command the evil that he puts his head in your healthy, then suspend those veins all around according to its wisdom, and let those circles subtle double according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And they should be done twice in degrees along the body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	then apply those forces gently, and squeeze the blood out of the wounds after an hour, until you can remove those wounds from the oil; and beware not to pierce the oil with the points of the spatulas, and do this work at midday in front of the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not stop until those wounds are removed; and when you have done this, distill green and red vinegar into the oil to corrupt what remains of the previous.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot gather all the herbs in that hour, then apply a plaster over the oil of things calming the pain of the eyes, and let it stay on for some time until the pain is soothed and it is assured there is no abscess, then begin again according to this method as long as they are not healed; and this is the form of forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the oil from the sinus.
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The mirror calls this "arissati" sinus: when you cure it with fire and medicine as I have said before, and it is not healed, then pierce in the place where the abscess was, and remove all the moisture that is there, until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the tooth is discovered, and you see the corruption and the blackness, then the instrument of this form is all the more; it is called «rough file», and it should be made of iron from the same as the main one, and pointed like a lime if it is in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	Then place the rough file on the surface of the tooth, then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand a little until you feel that that corruption is removed; do this once, then restore the surface of the tooth with drying medicines.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the tooth is sound, and the pulp is new, and the surface of the root is sound, and remains thus for forty days, and it does not re-open and is not postponed, and no bad accidents come, then remove it when it is healthy; if not, there is no other means than to bring the fistula to the pulp of the tooth according to this form: and you should discover the tooth the second time by iron and by medicines, and when it is discovered take the foret according to this form, and let the root be made of iron at three angles, and let the fust be attenuated just to the root as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place it above the bone of the arm, and move your hand away from the oil and pain, then return to the full extent of the forearm until it pierces the bone and the patient feels the pain as if it were coming from inside; and then restore the dislocated limb with dry medicines, as I have indicated, and when the char is born and hardens the limbs, then the matter goes to the elbow; this is a lighter thing for the pain.
de l’issue de l’oil	from the oil and pain
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes open wide and do not come to disturb the elbow, nor cause discomfort, then you must bind the pain; then clean it, then apply bandages or hats made of ferir to draw out succier, then place above the oil and a mixture of acacia and aloe and incense and sarcocolla, and then strain the oil, and apply the plaster with cloths and bandages; the manner of the cloths is that you grasp cloths that are sufficiently soft, and double each one into four, and then place one on top of the other according to the quantity needed; then strain it through a cloth that is very hard, and start the suction again without causing pain; then remove the suction and leave the oil strained day and night, and if the limbs are not demolished, then you must strain it strongly; then remove the bandage and the oil after the next day and night, and if you see the oil repairing, it is good; if not, then start the plaster and the cloths and the bandage and the suction until they are healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	The breaking of a silk cloth
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions come to the silk cloth, then open, and come forcefully like grains of resin, and is unpleasant to see; therefore, if you see it covered, the work is such that you should stick a needle into the root of the part below the arm above, then stick another needle or where the double thread of the arm is; and pierce it, and leave the first needle according to its position; then cover the double thread of the thread around the part of the wound, and hold it tightly, then remove the needle and put some soft oil on the wound, and let it stay until the thread cuts with the wound, then care for the wound with comforting things until the wound is healed; and never the wound is bandaged by a piece of cloth from each part of a circular piece of cloth, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes appear greatly affected, prick them with a fine needle that comes from under the skin, and draw out the moisture and wipe away the pus, and apply this immediately; then extract as much as is necessary until they are healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	from under the skin
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease which is called «alcunnati» is nothing more than a swelling that is assembled under the skin, resembling a sharp, descending arrow, but it is not an arrow; and the way of its appearance in the work is such that you make the pain sit on the seat, well-dressed and straight, then take the chief between your hands from both sides, and move the muscle until you see the swelling come up to your eyes; then let it go, and do not wipe off and do not dislodge it, and see the things as they should be; and if it does not disappear, then it is an arrow, and if it dislodges from the swelling, it is not as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If the painful part is placed between your hands, then take the thin spatula and place it under the corneal thread and gently pull on the continuation of the conjunctive with the corneal thread and the crown, until the arrow is released; and when it is released, then pour hot oil mixed with honey, or hot oil or fenugreek boiled with honey, then let it be treated with other treatments until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	of the hot oils
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have experienced similar cases in the division, and what is needed to pierce; if it works according to the health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	It is necessary that you make the dislocated joint rest between your hands crossed, outside of the light for the sun, and with clean and tightly stretched oil; then place the oil paper at your right hand if the joints are crossed, or at your left hand if they are uncrossed; then take in your right hand if the joints are crossed, or in your left hand if they are uncrossed, the instrument called "almagda", or in your right hand if the joints are uncrossed; then place the point of the almagda above the crown of the oil at the thickest part of the elbow, then press the almagda virtuously, and restore your hand as long as it pierces into the crown of the oil, and feel that the almagda is coming to the empty thing; and it is necessary that the measure of the almagda be at the front of the measure of the space that is from the gold to the end of the needle; and this is the crown of the oil; if you see the bone in that paper for the clarity of the canvas, and then place the instrument above it or at the sharp end, then extract one after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	if he sharp now sees the hairs in front of him and the instrument in his eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After resting a little, and if he sharp raises the second vein, put the feather with the instrument, and when it is stuck and does not rise, gently rotate your hand around and around; then place a small piece of silk gently into the eye.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then place by default the stuck oil or cotton soaked in red wine and plenty of vinegar, and tie with clean oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those of our time, put on top with plenty of vinegar.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the arrow cannot enter the oil due to its hardness, because there are some men who have very hard eyes, then you must use the instrument called "alberit", of which this is the shape:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And therefore pierce only the conjunctive, and do not move it too much, but make the eye soft, then push the arrow as we have said; and at the completion of the work compare to the patient's sleeping position, in which he sleeps on his back in the dark room; and avoid all movements, and take light foods, and do not move his head to the right or left, and tie according to his disposition just after this time; then remove him from this same dark room, and test his sight, and make him see some things, and then return the bandage on the seventh day; and you should not do this in the early hours of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you raise the eye, because the sharp pain quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	When abscesses come, you should apply a poultice before the seventh hour, and appease it with what quenches abscesses; and when it is calmed, remove the bandage and put oil on its face to cover any wound, and let it stay in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	Then slowly and gradually leave the dark house, and return to your own home; and let no one interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	Some came to us who was in the Yrach, who told us that in some countries people practice archery, where the arrowhead succeeds the arrow, but I have never seen any in our land, nor have I read any in books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the similarities of the forms of almada, because those who do not know them see them thus; and they are of pure rain:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And they are the heads of some from this same subtlety, and the rest in three angles awake.
de la char sor le neis	of the char for the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	Never do they ever arise or grow from the nose, of which there are some that seem like scorpions in size; and if there are such ones, or if there is a swollen wound of bad color, and if there is a soure wound of good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In that case of those wounds which are soure and not swollen, it is necessary for you to place the pain between your hands against the sun; and work its nostrils, and pour the onion juice to those wounds, and pull out the pus; because it is as if you could support the subtle sting of one part, until you know that that wound is completely healed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there is anything remaining that cannot be removed, open it with all the subtle and delicate instruments until nothing remains; and if it is an abscess, apply hot compresses as it should be; and if it is malignant abscesses, hurry and cauterize until the wound is not soaked and all the pus is removed. Then pour out or cleanse with vinegar and hot water.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If the wound does not heal, and moisture enters into the palate, it is because it is infected; and if moisture does not penetrate as it should, it is because there is a bone above, which prevents the instruments from cutting properly. Therefore, you must go inside with a thin piece of linen, and hold it with your hands, and leave some space between each thread; and put the bad parts of the thread into the wound through the mouth, and pull it out until it comes out through the mouth; and many times they do this in schools, and it is an easy thing for someone who wants to do it; then hold the part that comes out through the mouth with one hand, and the other part that comes out through the mouth with the other hand, and pull them together as we have shown.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Do this until you know that the newt is not corrupted with that cloth, then remove the filament, soak the blood, and moisten the filament in Egyptian wet compresses, and return it to the nose as before; do this three times or more, until the wet compresses corrode all that remains of the newt; then place or put a plug in the nose for several hours until it is healed, and if it needs medicated oils, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, with which one distills oils and medicines into the nose:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And it should be of silver or tin, shaped like an open lamp, such as a plug, and use it in the same way; and if you see, make a closed plug, and let the instruments be plain for purging the head; and have one hand on the head to hold when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the fire cautery
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Frequently, a disease arises at the base of the nose called "telul", which grows and becomes large over time; and because of this, it is necessary to cover it from the beginning, and to remove all the furrows, then place the fire cautery or the burning medicine on the affected area; and if it is difficult to cover it completely, if it is hard, of poor color, and without sensation: if you do not touch it with iron, because it is a hidden abscess, for when it is covered, great harm comes to the patient; and if the abscess is softly touched, not hard, and you see that it can be completely covered, then remove the abscess and cover it without fear, and cure the affected person of similar and restraining things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the bones are cut and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	For solutions in continuation come from one of these cartilages, which is of little use, as in some people.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, if the wound has no bone, look to see if the wound is fresh and full of blood; and then bring together the two lips at a seam, then treat it until it is healed; and if the lips are already rotten on one side and the other, it is necessary that you scorch all the parts of them until they are healed, then bring together the two lips at a seam, hold it in place, and powder with powder of dragon's blood, and frankincense; and put the powders on a piece of strong or other plaster, and leave it until it eats through him, then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The way of sewing is such that you gather the edges: either with needles, as we have said in the stitching of the belly; or with thread, as I have shown to you.
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	Some people have abscesses inside their lips, which are hard and small or large; therefore, it is necessary to turn the lips and cut under each tooth, and take them with pincers and rub in every part; then apply the wound after the incision of broken glass, until the wound is not stained; and then apply a poultice, and cure the wound of dry things until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	of the toothache
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times a toothache arises from the gums due to a cavity, which the ancients called "albulus"; it is necessary that you support it with forceps, and cut at its root, and let out the pus or the blood; then put on the tooth with vitriol powder broken into pieces, or other astringent and desiccating powders; and if the toothache returns after the incision, and often does, then cover it again and cauterize: if it does not return after the cautery; and these are the forms of instruments for covering.
des sordens	of the deaf
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Never are gathered at the head of the teeth, within the mouth between the teeth, sharp instruments which are disgusting and sharp; and sometimes the teeth are black and yellow and green, until the corruption reaches the tooth, and they are foul-smelling teeth. Therefore, you should make the patient sit the pain between your hands, and their teeth in your holy place, and clean the teeth or the sharp instruments wherever they appear, until nothing remains; and thus remove the blackness and greenness and yellowing and other stains, as long as they are cleaned. And if you remove what is at the first level, it is good; but if not, then start again from the second day and the third tool, until you have removed everything. And know that the teeth have a matter of various forms of instruments to clean, according to what the work demonstrates, because the razor with which you clean the teeth has different forms than the one used between the teeth; and these forms and others should be prepared with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when treating a toothache that you delay pulling it for as long as possible, for one should not do this; for it is a substance very high and thus one has no excuse to pull it.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Therefore, when the pain is constrained to pull the tooth, you must be certain of the tooth hurting.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Many times the pain of the tooth is deceived, and one must be sure it is a holy tooth, and pull out the good tooth; and then the pain does not depart, until the evil is extracted, for we have already done this to these saints; and when you are certain of the tooth hurting, then it is necessary that you burn around the tooth at all points; then move it with your fingers or subtle forceps at the first and second point, until it is well dislodged, then firmly fix the forceps; and let the one with the pain in your holy mouth between your teeth, and hold it so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After straightening the tooth correctly without breaking, and if it does not jump back, take one of these tools and gently push it into each part lightly, and shake it as you did first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the tooth is pierced and broken, it is necessary to fill it with cloths where the pulps are; and if the straightening subtly has a crack, that it does not break when being pulled out; and it is very important to cover around the gum to relieve the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And be careful not to break it, and that a part remains, and again cause the patient great pain by the malice of the root.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And beware that you do not act in such a way as the ignorant physicians, who by their haste and boldness break the chariots every time, and do not remedy what we have told; but bring about great disease from the roots that they delay, or from the chariots that they break, as often as we have seen; and when the bone is drawn, wash the leg with wine or vinegar and salt; and if blood flows, use the leg often with vitriol broth; and if it does not work, cauterize.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The forms of instruments, by which one moves the first tooth, should be long pointed and large-handed, so they do not bend when you pull the tooth; and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should be large-bodied so they do not bend when pulling, and they should be made of good iron, and they should be pointed to hold the tooth.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the tooth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains when pulling, it is necessary to put a moistened cloth on the wound or two or three.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	so long as the wound is softened, then pull the forceps called "algefri", of which the patient seems to have a sharp edge; and they should be made inside like a file and this is the form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots will not come out at all these needles, then it is necessary that you dig around the root completely, and put the tool called "althali", which is a spoon, of which this is the shape:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And it should be large enough so that it does not break into pieces, and if the root jumps out of the ground, it is good; if not, with all the tools, of which these shapes come after:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you use this tool that has two prongs, of which this shape comes:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other tools that are before in the range of the teeth, and of this tool that seems like large needles, of which this shape comes:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And let this instrument be used only when it cannot break, and sharp that many tools of dense are; and also other tools, which are not mentioned here; and the wise masters find their own tool by themselves, according to what their works and the disease show them, because there are some diseases where the ancients did not teach any tool for the diversity of them; and if they have broken the chariot or other bones, or if it has caused harm, if they search for tools that are needed, as I have told you, and help with gestures, of which this is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And they should be thick and well-holding to hold the bone, so it does not escape, but he can hold and remove; then restore the limb with appropriate medicines according to this, and if there is decay in the bone, and it is small, if the surgeon has all this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not according to the natural course, and its shape is ugly, and especially in young women, it is necessary that you remove the tooth after the tooth, and it is not in the right place, and one cannot be a dentist or limer; then the ray; and if it is attached with the tooth, take this instrument from which there is the shape, and it is similar to the small beak, and it is made of iron sharp at the end:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the tooth becomes increasingly painful over time due to its hardness, and because you do not move the other teeth, and if it appears that one can be removed, then the tooth is extracted with a tool like this:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	And it is also like the tooth of which arrows are made; and in extracting the tooth, one gradually moves it over time, so that it does not move until it breaks; then, at the end, with any sharp instrument, and if the tooth is too deeply embedded and bleeds the tongue, then one must extract the sharpness until it is even, so that it does not bleed the tongue or corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	when they pull out teeth
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	when they pull out teeth, either by pulling or by hammering, and the patient cannot press up against the pain that makes them want to spit out what they are holding in their mouth, and you treat them with tightening medicines, it does not work; then you should restrain them with a gold wire, because silver wire turns green and rots, but gold never does; and let the wire be neither too thin nor too thick, according to the quantity of the space between the teeth; and if you see the teeth are moving, take the wire and double it between the two healthy teeth, then put the sick tooth between the other teeth, as many times as there is one or more, until you feel firmly against the healthy tooth on the other side; then continue the covering towards the part where you started, and gently and firmly press your hand, so that it does not move at all; and let your thread be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then cut the broken teeth with a thin wire, and gather them together, and place them between the healthy tooth and the gum, so that they do not bleed the tongue; and then leave them thus tightly as long as possible, and if they dislodge, or the wire breaks, then use another wire; if they remain, and serve in this way throughout their entire time, and this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the reattachment of the two healthy teeth, and the two missing, as you see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth cracks, if it is reset in its place, from small to small, as we have said; and it does not interfere with anything that is wise and suffering, and never once made the shape of an animal's tooth, and it is placed in the place where the defect is, and it is tightened as we have said, and it remains and serves in this way for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	to cover the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	Never is there a fracture of the jaw that comes from dislocation of the tongue or naturally, which one is born thus; or by accident of wounding; and the works are such that you cover the mouth with the tongue, and hold its head in your own, and lift the tongue; then cover the nerve of the jaw with a wide cloth, until the tongue is dislodged from its place, and if it is hard or does not move, and this is due to wounding, if you boil the wound and cover it with a wide cloth; and be careful that the wound is not too much in front, for the artery which is outside; and when you have done, lift the jaw of high rose and vinegar, or high cold water, then remove the tongue from one tent of linen; and treat the wound with vinegar every night, that the wounds may not stick.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	If there is bleeding from an arrow, put a piece of broken glass on the wound; if it does not stop, cauterize with slow-burning charcoal, which is good for the flesh; then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see that the wound is of a dark or black color and hard, and the patient does not feel pain, do not touch it, for it is chancre; and if it is discharging pus and there is moisture, pour it out, and put a thin sponge underneath, and deliver it from both sides; and if it does not stop bleeding at your work, place broken glass on it until it stops bleeding, then return to your work until you remove all the blood; then lift up the limb and bandage it, and treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	of throat abscesses
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	There are no abscesses in the throat that are called "godath", and they are properly called the II mandibles, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, then take care: if it is an abscess hard of small size and of brown color, do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, also for the escape of blood; but let it be so long as it is alive, and then you will break it, or it will break by itself; and if it is of white color and the root is thin, have prepared the instrument to cover, but first check that the abscess has settled and is calm.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Then make the patient sit with their back to the sun, and their injured side facing upwards, and the operator's hand on their shoulder, and press the tongue away from all the instruments, of which this is the form; and it should be of silver or fine brass like some knives:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	If you press the tongue against all these instruments, and you see the abscess, then take the lancet and the needle in the amber, and draw it out above as far as you can; and take nothing else with, then cover the instrument, of which this is the form, which seems like a forceps; and all the chief are curved, and one end the other, and they are very sharp, and it is made of iron or steel:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	If you do not have this instrument present, if it is shaped like a pair of tongs, with this form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And it should be shaped like tongs on one side and flat on the other; and when you have taken hold of one of the tongs, take hold of the other in the same manner, and after the incision gargle the sharp pain with hot, sharp, and cold water, and if there is blood coming out, gargle the sharp pain with hot water, or use pounded green pomegranate skins or mint leaves, and similar things, until the wound is clean; then treat the cure as long as it is healthy; and never any other abscesses than the two tongs are born in the throat, so take them then like the two tongs should be.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	I treated a woman with an abscess that was closed within her throat, namely a small abscess; and she had almost completely closed her throat, so that the woman could not breathe due to the condition she was in, and could not eat or drink, and died if she remained like this for a day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so high that it had been placed with two needles through the two nostrils.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I therefore acted quickly, and pierced one end with a needle, then I removed a large portion of the abscess; then I refilled the other nostril with another needle, and I pushed the tongue out of the mouth; afterwards I pierced the other end of the abscess, and collected a part of it, and only a small amount of blood came out; thus the woman's breathing was restored to her, and she began to drink water and wine, and did not stop cutting away at that abscess for a long time; the abscess grew again and filled the cavity that I had emptied, until it became very large; then I pushed it back in and cauterized it within her throat: thus she did not grow again; and I left those parts and only God knows what happened to her afterwards.
de l’uve	of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When it comes to the eye, and it is inflamed and long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is not too large and round, it is called "eye".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help much, and you see that the swelling of the abscess is calmed, and it is thin, then you should cover it; and the one that is round and not long; and if it is bloody or dark red or black, then you should avoid the incision of the.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger in the pain.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	When you see it, as I have said, according to its length and width, you should place the painful part in front of the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument that we have mentioned earlier; then cut the incision in the vein, and draw out the blood, and bind it with one or two of the instruments that I have mentioned for the incision of the two arrows.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And it is necessary that you only bind as much as the excess that is beyond the natural limit; for if you bind more, it will cause great pain to the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two arrows, and treat it until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the pain is not too great, it is recommended that you use a device for the cauterization of the sensitive parts.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the method of the cauterization is sharp and quick.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And the patient places his head on your shoulder, and then presses the tongue against the instrument we have mentioned in the chapter of cauterization, and applies with very hot fire, so that it is not too thick or too clear; and while moving this instrument, which has the following form:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the head has a hair or object that one uses to apply the medicine, like the movement of a spoon, and places the instrument on top of the medicine over the tongue; and the patient lies on his side, so that saliva and mucus flow from his mouth into the medicine inside, so that it does not drip down the throat and into the lungs; then hold your hand over the entire medicine and press it over the tongue for half an hour, until you see the medicine is effective and the effects of the medicine are calmed; and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and wipe the cotton in the medicine, and blow the instrument through the cotton into the throat, until the cotton burns over the tongue; and do this often, until the cauterization of the medicine is perfect, then let it dry for four or five days, and if you have to restart the cauterization of the medicine, start again, and after the cauterization, wipe it around the tongue with cotton soaked in butter, and clean what is around the medicine; and be covered with hot water, and be treated with gargles until they are healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer from the incision than the cauterization; if it is treated with fumigation in this way, take chamomile and hyssop and origanum and rue and camomile and similar herbs, and gather all or some of them in a pot, and put in vinegar, and make boil; and the pot should be well sealed with strong earth, and inside the pot have an instrument like this:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And it should be of silver or tin, and one of the prongs stuck in the patient's mouth until the steam rises to the ulcer through the gum, until the ulcer is dead; afterwards, repeat often, until the ulcer dries, and guard that you do not make steam at the beginning of the appearance of the abscess, for many things happen; and do not make steam except at the decline of the abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, take a cloth and put it inside the head, so that the tongue does not stick out too much; for the cloth does not cause the vapor to burden the mouth, and it is a good cure together with safety.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times, it is necessary to remove bones or fish spines from the throat, or nothing at all; therefore, you must remove what you can see, and press the tongue against the sun at all instruments, so that you can see the thing; and what does not open for you and is returned to the throat, it is necessary to make the patient vomit the thing as soon as the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps if the thing is removed by vomiting; or the patient has swallowed a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a lettuce root, or a piece of dry bread; and tie the sponge to the thread, and then swallow it; and when it comes back to the throat, it will stick, and then pull it out; and if it does not come out as we have said, take the instrument according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the curved instruments be bent at the head so that they can more lightly enter into the throat, and have the head raised high; and guard that you do not touch the epiglottis, that the whole does not come, or push in the bone; and it is better that the hairs push the instrument, for it is softer or the thing is as such; if it goes down, or it pulls it all along the instrument evenly, as long as it is full.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the throat sinew
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	The throat sinew is never treated with medicine as I said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when it does not help, then look at the throat of the pain to the sun, then press the tongue against the instrument that I told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the sinew, then cut it at every small notch, or with fine needles that are worth the use.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if it does not hold, then take a hairy cord, and push it into the throat of the patient, then push or move the cord with the sharp iron, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient's wound becomes infected all day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take plenty of cold water, and open the mouth, and pour it down their throat, and move it with your hand often; and if as soon as the sinew feels the cold, then stop.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if she does not cough as we have said, then smoke the bad breath of asafoetida with the instrument I mentioned in the fumigation of onions; do this many times, for it will eventually stop.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the way of the fumigation is that you hold a pot or where there is charcoal visible, and place it in the middle of a cover, and in that puncture the patient with the instrument; then pour your fumigation, and put the bad breath in their mouth, and close their mouth, so that the fumes do not escape, but go just to their nose; and the nose will now clear up, and if she does not cough, start the fumigation again many times; and let the patient fast, and give them things that are salty and other, and do not let them drink any vinegar; and thus it is the matter that they will be cured by this government.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument used to treat the shoulder is, when it can be seen, similar to curved hooks entering the throat; and it resembles a beak, and there is a roughness of lime, so that whatever it takes, it cannot slip. And this is its form:
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapters on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	There are many types of abscess, according to what the memory comes after one and another in this book, and they differ in perforation and cutting; and it is in two ways that one is in its own form, and because it holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second method is for those who are at the neck.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscesses of the head are different from those of the foundation, and the abscesses of the neck are different from those that come in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if there are abscesses that one should not pierce until the boil is dead according to its completion; and if there are such as it is necessary to pierce when they are ripe, and do not die according to their completion, as abscess that are beyond joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come beyond joints, and one leaves it until it is swollen inside, perhaps the ligament and the nerve of the joint are corrupted, by which it is the cause of contraction in that member.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	When the abscess is located away from the main limb, and if you delay the perforation until it dies, it will harm the main limb; or if it is located away from the base, if you pierce it too late, it will not be able to pass through, and will remain inside, and there will be a fistula; and it cannot be healed in the long term.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it is necessary to remove the pus from the abscess that has died according to the completion of the drainage, and this is when the pain is relieved, and the departure of the fever, and the lessening of the pain and the swelling, and the relief and the easing of the main abscess, and the other signs; and it is necessary to make the drainage wherever it depends from the abscess, and where it opens into the muscle; and it should be the longitudinal course of the body, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all equal places where there is no pus.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In these cases, according to the affected limb.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when abscesses are in the throat, it is better to leave the puncture until it is confirmed that digestion has been completed, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you puncture it beforehand, it may spread along with the blood of the vein, and is stained with much feces; and by chance it hardens the lips and penetrates deeply into it.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if any abscess that is punctured according to the width of the vein, according to what the limbs have to do.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And it is necessary that you incise small abscesses, small pustules; and in large abscesses, large pustules, and many cuts according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses or it is necessary to cover the cure, and to cover; when it has become as soft as cloth, and is dead, then it is necessary to do as one does with bubbles: and if there are such abscesses that are cut in three angles, and if there are such abscesses that one covers like the flank of a mule, like an abscess of an angle; and if there are such abscesses where one makes a round cut, and other cuts and coverings.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	For those who do not have a head, if the abscess is superficial, it is necessary to puncture it completely; and when the abscess is large, and has much pus, and you puncture it, if you do not draw out all the pus in that hour, but only part of it; then treat the abscess again the next day, then draw out nothing else; do this repeatedly many times, until all the pus is drawn out; especially if the wound is of weak virtue, or a woman bearing, or small children, or old decrepit people.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the experienced should never once with the issue of the pus, that by chance the wound dies, and you do not lose it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have perceived your abscess, suck the wound, and see if the abscess wound is small; and if a tailor complains, alleviate the pain with linen or woolen cotton; and if there are large abscesses, and there is much pus, it is necessary that you fill each one with old cotton or rags of linen without moisture, and tie it to the wound; then open, and treat the dressing until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if there is bleeding in your work, apply sharp cold and wet compresses, and wipe the blood, and place it on the affected area repeatedly.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the bleeding persists, apply government and care, and the powders I mentioned in this book, and if it is not too tight, and if the wound or abscess is very painful, then you should put on tents and wet cloths soaked in wine and oil; and if it is in a state of inflammation, and the wound is charred, then you should put on wet cloths soaked in cold water and oil, or warm wine and oil, as we have said; then drain the abscess and dress it and treat it, as appropriate, until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And it is necessary to know universally about the treatment of abscesses: now I have told you how to proceed before treating abscesses, and see this chapter.
des soros	of sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Or when small abscesses come from the head, and are like those that are in cloth, as is the joist of a girl's skirt, and there are many similarities.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are also large and such ones that have moisture like chickens; and there are some that are hard and rough to cut, and there is no doubt if the artery does not go against it.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of the belly is such that you should try all instruments called "intestinoscope", from which this thing comes about.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, it does so through the long one.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is drained, scrape off anything that contains that moisture, for it will remain in place if left alone; then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if present; if not, in vinegar and salt, and apply it to the wound, and leave it there the next day; and this will prevent what remains from lasting longer.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then, as before, the second day, and the third, until you are sure it will not remain overnight; then treat the wound with an ointment suitable for its condition, until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess does not yield quickly, then prick it according to this form, from the long side; and pour in your pinpricks, and scrape off all parts of the skin, and put all your care into drawing out the pus from where it is located. And if the artery opposes you, do as I have told you afterward.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also treat the abscess if it is piercing, and cut and cure as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And on the abscess above the bone, if it is soft and watery, it is less bloody because it contains little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if some of these abscesses or boils have no moisture, and if they are like the ones I copied from an old woman; and I found the abscess as hard and rough and white as a stone, and could not break it; and if one had tried to cut it, one would have made just as bad a wound as from a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses, it is because those that come from the top of children and at the roots of the ears, the opening should always be made at the lowest part of the joint, to let the pus out; and treat them as appropriate.
des scrophules	of tumors
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	often have abscesses at the neck, and remove the tonsils, and then anger, and sometimes come from other parts of the body, and are very large, and are intertwined with each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	and each tumor is properly within its own side, as with the one and the abscess of the head, as we have said; and the similarities of these tumors are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and if there are malicious ones that will not obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	in that one then that you see of good disposition to the touch, and is similar to the color of the blood, and moves from each part and is not near the neck nor the artery nor the conduit, and is not deeply; then it is necessary that you cut through above, and scrape every part, and set the two lips of the wound as evenly as possible, if you have skill, as we have said in abscesses of the head; and pull out little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, and that it is not too narrow, that the hand does not escape, and does not see too early, that you do not cover what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you cut the vein or the artery, and it does not stop bleeding, pour into the wound vitriol broth, or some powders that stop blood, and close the wound; and leave it until the abscess is soothed, and the wound is healed, and begin to sew.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the wound is cleansed, return to your work, until you complete it; then examine your patient to see if there are any small pustules remaining, and cut and drain them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a large vein in the root of the pustule, it is not advisable to cut that pustule at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it drop through it, without causing harm; then fill the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then treat it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you remove the entire scab, it is necessary that you gather together the two lips of the wound, and hold them in place now, as there is no longer any excess due to the size of the scab.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	It is necessary that you cover the root of the tooth with a material and draw out the pulp, and hold it as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those scabs that remain excessively should be pricked where the pus is most abundant; and prick them in this way, hanging down, then apply ointment and similar things, so that they do not corrupt what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, apply charoite ointment until it is healed.
de squinance	of squinting
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients spoke and said of the throat-cutter; but I have never seen one in our land, and this is the written record of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	To those who have squinting, it is necessary that the furrow of the throat which is called "epiglottis" be avoided; and this cannot be helped because all the veins and the pore of the evil are in those who have abscesses greatly in the mouth, or in the throat or in the hollows.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the throat, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the danger of strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	It is therefore necessary, when we want to cut the epiglottis, that we cut it through three circles or four with a small cut across, between the two circles or by the amount of the cut through the soft tissue, not in the cartilage; and those who are thus suitable for the section of the epiglottis have no charcoal, and their vessels are long.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the master is afraid, then it is necessary to stretch the skin of the neck all around, then cut the throat until it reaches the windpipe; avoid the blood vessels of blood, if you see anything, and then cover the soft tissue, as we have said; and it is demonstrated by the section of the stream of the windpipe that flows through the bone that is broken, and by the lack of voice; and leave the wound open for a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed for which we doubt strangulation, gather both lips of the wound together, and close it entirely without the cartilage; then administer medicines that cause vomiting until they are expelled.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasis says that we should not do this unless the throat is completely stiffened, and the hairs are judged to be dead, and the defect has healed.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Therefore, one should cover the epiglottis for this reason that the hairs cannot support, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is kept from death; and because they ordered the ancients to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease had passed, and it had passed in three days or four. And therefore, they commanded to sew the wound and cure, as long as it was cured; and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw that a young lady took a dagger and stabbed herself in the throat, and cut part of her windpipe; and I was called to cure her, and found her as if dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found that an arrow had come out of it, and although she had not bled much or coughed blood except from her throat, and the blood came out through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hurried and closed the wound, and cured it until it was healed; and she did not die as long as she was able to speak, and she returned to her usual state afterwards; because I believe that in the covering of the epiglottis there is no fear.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	This abscess is called "hernia of the throat," and it is a great abscess in the color of a yolk, and it is very common in women; and it occurs in two ways: natural, and accidental; or naturally, without any cause.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accidental one occurs in two ways: one way is similar to a large goiter, and the other way is similar to an abscess that comes from our artery; and there is fear, and it should not be opened except by a small incision in the neck, and the proof and search are made through all the incisions: if you find it as I have described, and it cannot be removed at all, then cover it as one would cover a goiter, and bring it out entirely, if there is any; and examine it well, and treat it as it should be, until it is completely healed.
des nous	of us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	Many ways of ours are, of which I will say all the similarities; and now it is necessary that I tell the whole difference between us and them.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that issue is hot and feverish, until the ebullitions are passed, and it is accompanied by putrefaction; then the fever and heat rest.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With ours there is no heat or fever or pain, and it contains the syphilitic pustule, which is its own secretion and is according to the color of the body, and begins like a small spot, and becomes large; and they are according to two similarities, either dry or moist, and much of the color is as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	When you come to the cure of a patient, it is necessary to first test and inquire about the "entromissoire" instrument, according to its form as described in the following chapter.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the method of inquiry for abscesses is that you hold or press a moist cloth over the abscess, and gradually pull it back, until you feel that the instrument has pierced the center, then adjust the "entromissoire" according to the size of the abscess; then remove it, and be careful that it does not slip.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If the running wound is moist and has a certain color, make it as I have described for other abscesses; and if after the "entromissoire" does not come out moist, check that it is fat, then cut it in a cross shape, and take it with pincers, and scrape off all the skin from each part and wipe the coat or where it was so that you remove it clean with the patient; and if you cannot remove it clean, then tear it into pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	If nothing remains, it returns to us many times; and if it lingers for a short time, and does not trouble you, apply some corrosive powders to the wound, close the wound, and place soothing things on the abscess, and treat other wounds until they are healed; and if it is large, cut out the two lips of the wound, and treat what remains with char.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	And if it be contrary or other, and you are in a hurry, apply the leg of broken glass, and leave it for two or three days until the wound closes, and let the blood clot; then return to the copper that remains from the blood.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Here are the forms of instruments used for extracting foreign bodies, and there are three ways: large, medium, and small; and there are three quarters that are called "albaret", and one that is called "breb", and there are also three ways: large, medium, and small, to extract the stones of fistulas; and they are like the needles that one buys for sewing, and are made of brass yellow, or iron, or silver, and cost as much as those that are already yellow, and are more commonly used to extract the stones of fistulas; and they are of three ways: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the fistulas.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The forms of nails are of many similarities, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and if there are nails with two beaks of three ways; and if there are nails with three beaks, and they are also of three ways; and if there are nails with two beaks, and a single beak nail, and they are of three ways; and all this is necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The heads of these that we use are sharp, and there are some that do not cut more than from one part, from which we scrape the skin, because we do not want to cut the vein or nerve; and these probes are the needles returned in hand-held form, so that the pain does not persist at the opening of abscesses; and they are of three ways: large, small, and medium, as you see; and no other instrument is used except in lean places, such as legs, arms, breasts, and joints, and similar places; and never made any other tool small, resembling the scrapes of pustules, according to this form, for evacuating blood:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it is never placed back in its proper place which can cope with veins, and arteries, and never again returns to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Never inflate the breasts of some men when they begin to rot, as they seem like the breasts of a woman; and they remain swollen and inflamed, and if anyone wants to cure them, it is necessary to follow this form of this line .b. to .g.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Then scrape the fat, and fill the wound with a healing charcoal powder, then stitch the two lips of the wound together, and cure it until it is healed; and if the breast sinks down, and is softened by its great size like in women, and is sewn together in the ribs above, because of similar tears; so that one holds the other at the end of each, so that the greatest line contains the smallest according to this form, from this line .b. to the line .g.; then scrape the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about sewing and powders, and what is necessary in the cure, until it is healed; and if it is not healed, or the incision is not completely made, because the pain does not want to rest, or because of the flow of blood, then it is necessary to fill the wound with a corrosive cotton swab; and let it remain until it melts the remaining fat, then cure it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses of the ankles
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come from the ankles are hard lumps or with cuts, and they contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Therefore, those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from the line b to the line g:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus that is in the abscess is drained, apply old cloth to the wound and leave it until the other day, then remove all the cloth, and treat with ointment as necessary until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if it is an abscess of similar appearance to a scrofula, then make incisions in the same way as we have described for cutting into scrofula, and if the wound remains open, then cauterize it as we have described before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is ruptured, and the skin above it is discolored, then there are often abscesses, and also bleeding from the vein; and if you know that it is due to the artery, then make incisions along its length; and when you feel it with your fingers, it will be painful; and when it is due to the vein, it will be red and swollen; and it is foolish to cover this abscess, and especially when it is outside of the bones and angles and chest and in many other places, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, it is necessary to avoid the use of iron and the one who is in charge should also avoid it, and in the one who is swollen due to arterial bleeding through a long incision in the skin; then open the belly with small incisions, and separate the artery from the cloth until it is exposed; then insert a needle on the other side, and pierce the other side with another needle, and tie the artery with a double thread according to what I have indicated in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples; then do not remove the piece between the two limbs of the intestine until the one that is missing has been removed, and if it is an abscess, so it should be treated as indicated, until it is healed; and if it is for the belly, if there is an abscess, so you should dip your hand in what comes from the abscess to all the skin, then remove the needle from the piece that you hold in your hand, and pierce it, and there should be a double thread, so that you can pull it from the other side; then tie the abscess as I have indicated, or with one of the two threads of the other side of the needle; and if you doubt that the thread will not fit, then insert another needle throughout the entire abscess at the incision of the first needle, and tie the threads in four pieces; then cover the abscess until the excess is removed, then cover the excess with the cure and leave what is tied; then place a moistened cloth on it in wine and oil, then treat the wounds and ointments until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses of nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Similarly, abscesses come to the arteries and veins, and abscesses also come to nerves when they are injured or from too much work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And it often happens to the helpers and the doctors in all the limbs where there are joints, and this is the greatest abscess, and its color resembles the color of the flesh, and it is in many positions with pain; and when one stretches it, one feels the pain, and it is not from the flesh, but outside the skin; and it moves from all parts, and does not go forward or backward, nor up or down, and those who are in joints do not need to be covered by iron: perhaps there will be contraction; and those who are in the head or face, making the skin thin.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, if it has a head, and you cut at its root; and if it is large, if you suspend it from its base, and scrape it, then remove the bone and assemble the wound at the seam, and treat it until it is healed.
des grosses boces pendans	of large swellings hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	There is no case in the belly and not elsewhere, and it is a disease called "funge" by its resemblance to pus, and it has a subtle root, and large swellings; and there are small and very large ones; and I saw the man who had two or three bellies that were more like funges than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had a small root, and they were torn, and it spread with moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I copied and found in one weighing eighteen ounces, and in the other six drams, and the work in the incision is such that you should look to see if the hairs are moist, and the color of the artifact is white and moist and of subtle root; if the copper is large, and they are in your presence the fire cautery.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For in the cutting often comes too great blood loss, and if you do not see the hair escaping and painful from the incision of the iron, then take the thread well made, and tie the artifact as we have said, and leave it for two days; then restrain it, and do not stop pulling the thread through until it covers the artifact, and work through it with effort; and if the roots are large, then use the copper directly on the belly, but you must cover half of it, then cauterize that it does not return; then cure the wound, and guard that you do not cover the thin which is of pale color and poor sense and of little regard.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For these are abscesses that have become infected, and I will come to treat chancres afterwards.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the body is full of blood
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the appearance of the fullness comes from the cauterization of a wound or a cut of the syphilitic ulcer, and it is above the belly and in some of the bruises, as it has in other wounds, of blood that cuts veins or arteries according to what is before, or of pus; and if it is from the rupture of the syphilitic ulcer and from the issue of the pus, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the blood, and it is a light thing without pain, and open from various issues.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the end of the intestine, then it is the most diverse, and when pressed at both ends, it returns, and perhaps it is torn, and greatly enlarges at the entrance of the bath and for great effort.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to moisture, it is a light matter, and opens well when pressed with the hand, but do not force much; and if it is due to blood, it is wide open by these signs of abscesses, which are thick and hard, and is like a bag; and if it is due to windiness, it is soft to the touch, and the appearance is whether it is for the blood of the artery, or the vein, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If you must leave the care.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter of abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if it appears to be for the intestine or the abscess, then you must command the patient to dye his linen, and let it extend straight all around, then sign around the belly; then command him to lie still between your hands, then go around the part that you have marked with a strong silk cord, and make sure the intestine is not included; if you find the linen, cut it off, and bring out the intestine from behind the stomach; and if you find the abscess, take it at the base, and scrape away the excess; and if the artery or vein goes against you, go around it carefully, then return to your work and take two needles, and thread two pieces of strong silk, and cut the abscess into four parts with the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave the part as long as it can bear, and kill the dead flesh by itself; or you can cover it when it has become thin and ready to burst, then cure the part as we have said; and strain out the pus or the moisture that you have found, then cure the part as it needs, and soak the part.
dou chancre	For the fire cauterization, instruct
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have mentioned in the division the similarities of chancre, and how one must work with medicines, and how one must avoid the cure of iron; and we say that chancre is engendered in the marsh, and great caution is needed in its cure, and the ancient one said that when chancre is in a place where it can be removed as chancre which is in mammaries, and in the chest, and in similar places, and one must remove all of it when it is in the beginning; and when it is large and old, if one does not advise approaching it, for I have never seen anyone heal it; and no one has ever healed it before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the procedures, when it is in a place where it can be removed, as we have said, is that you remove the hairs once of black coal; then clean it if it has manifest repletion, then bathe the wound in good blood for the procedure; then pour your bile or pus, and the hair from all parts, and the bone from all parts without leaving anything; and let the blood flow fully, and wipe well the wound with your hand or something, and if the bleeding does not stop, it makes you contrary to the incision of the artery or vein, if it cauterizes until the blood is stopped; then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have said in the division the similarities of dropsy, and how the assembly of the sharp is made, and the signs of each similarity, and the cure that is done by medicines, and that which is cured by fire: if it is only swelling; and one should not touch with fire in these two similarities: that is to say, tympanites and hyposarche, for this is a fatal thing; therefore when you treat this similarity of dropsy which is called "eclites" by medicines, and the cure does not work, if you look at whether the pains are weak, or if he has another disease besides dropsy, as vomiting and similar things; then do not touch with fire, for there is doubt; and if you see the patient of great virtue, and he has no other disease but dropsy alone, and he is neither too young nor too old, then thus: lift the patient upright over your hands, and the ministers press the belly emptying the sharp to the lowest part of the least, then take the sponge according to this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let them be cut from both sides.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	And cut from the tip, and ensure that no part is cut so thinly that it can reach the intestines when thrown, and cannot be bleached; then check if there is hernia towards the intestines: if necessary, make a cut of three fingers' breadth from the left side of the belly three fingers' breadth above the navel; and if it is for liver disease, make your cut on the right side of the belly three fingers' breadth; and if it is for the spleen, make it on the left side, and do not let the hairs grow over the cut so that the excess does not run to the weak side; then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and push, and withdraw your hand from all the space between the skin and the flesh as you would when scraping a quantity of an inch or around; then pierce the flesh until the space reaches the desired length, and that is the length of the wound, then remove it, and push this instrument of which this is the shape:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it is similar to a thin silver chain, and is made of light rain or chalk, and has small perforations; and on one side, three perforations; and two on the other side, and one on the other; and the patient's tail is cut as if with a pen, and that is the shape of the incision that the scribes make to write with the pen.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	At the top of the instrument is the awl, so that when the instrument comes to the skin, then write now above the instrument; without the half or the third part, because if you take more than it should be in that hour, by chance if the patient dies from the resolution of his spirit of the arm, or he throws his hand, or he approaches death; but in accordance with the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the wound signify, and its pricks; then take the instrument and retain the skin, and it is retained now for the one who stops the perforation that is above the eyebrow, of which I have spoken, that you pierce in this manner; then start the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering so, and take a small quantity of blood from the skin; do this every day, and guard yourself from following as long as it does not delay but only a little blood.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt the pain, and you let it out too much, then the care of the sepulture or sand cures, and by much sweating or bathing and in the sun, and if it becomes infected; and the care of desiccative medicines until they are healed, and cauterize above the stomach and above the liver and above the spleen after the extraction of the sharp object, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the insertion of the rod
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	No child ever is born without a wart on the rod, or the wart is small, or it is not in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is necessary to pierce everywhere very thinly according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then place or pierce very thin threads of linen, and bind it and keep it in this way for three days or four, and when he wants to urinate, if it is not convenient, then remove the threads and let him urinate, and then put them back; because the urine that comes out does not leave it closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	If the one who is pierced is small, then it is treated with a thin thread of linen, as we have said, and it will expand.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have the piercing in their own leg are foolish, because no one is born with a piercing at the top of the thigh, so that they cannot urinate before their thigh is raised; and they cannot defecate because the matter cannot come down to the marris, and it is a very bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the manner of the work is such that the hairs lie flat on their backs, with the head of the knife and the blade as narrow as the tail of a pen, so that the puncture is made in the middle, as it should be; and beware of bleeding from the wound, which often occurs, and if it does, stop the flow of blood with a bandage, and treat the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	of the pustules of the knife
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Often come cysts in the knife, and it is an appearance of a wound that is ugly; and there are both malignant and non-malignant ones; if you should prick them with a fine needle, and cut and clean all of them, then put on a moistened cloth in Egyptian ointment; then treat the wound until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	If it is a bad dislocation, with a putrid color and swelling, then you must apply heat.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have treated it, and if the dislocation is in the middle of the bone and part inside and part outside, then you must first fix the dislocation that is inside; and when it is fixed, then treat the outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you treat them together, if the bone is not pierced, and it turns black and corrupts in its bone and at the joint; then remove all that is black and corrupted, then apply the plaster of honey and flour that is made from the skins of grapefruits and oranges, then treat other treatments until it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	If there is bleeding from a wound, then apply the lunar caustic according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cauteries help in two situations together: that is, at the outflow of blood, and in corruption; and if the tail is corrupted and retracted, then it is necessary to apply a piece of cloth soaked in urine on the wounds, and piss on the painful parts; and when the hair goes up to the head of the stick which has not been circumcised, or if it is for a wound or an abscess, then it is necessary to burn it with the instrument that is at the end of the stick, until the flesh is separated, and deliver the tail from all parts; and if it is a difficult thing to do this, then it is necessary to burn it at the head of the stick and the skin, and then apply a subtle dressing of linen moistened in cold water, so that it does not grow back.
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not like other wounds; however, when we perform this work of our desire, and properly on children, it is necessary that we do the best work, and the lightest in terms of health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not practice circumcision on their children because they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have seen the majority of masters and sages who performed circumcision in the ancient times, and they all did it the same way; if there was two threads, and by chance if someone pulled one above and the other below, it could cause a problem.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or the recovery is complicated, and the pain is doubled, and in the disinfection that is not always sure of the point of the member; and in the disinfection of the finger, perhaps the needle slips and pierces the work, and often they are born such that they have no need of disinfection and I have seen it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the disinfection that is done with force to the whole length of the thread, I found the goodness of the experiment, because the forces cut equally as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you press your hand, it cuts equally in all the thread; but that the thread be well stretched around the skin; and that the manner of the first work is that you make the child think, if he listens, that you only tie the thread around the stick as much as possible, and then throw it in all ways that you can; then bring the thread straight between your hands, and hold the force between your hands or outside your feet that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then close your hand on the stick and blow gently, and take it up as high as the part of the stick is ens; then clean it well from the dirt that is gathered, then tie the limb with a double thread, then tie it away from one end to the other; and hold it in two places by the second work, and cover between the two threads, then lift the gentle thing up slowly and take the head of the stick; then let the blood drip little by little, for that is the most dangerous; and put powder on and on the powder a paste made of one part of honey cooked badly with rosewater, confected with rose oil and fresh, and leave it there until the other day, and cure the other cure until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the forces for the mummification is such: the two shoulder blades should be close and sharp, and the shoulders should also be as great as the chest evenly.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of the mummification is when the knife enters during the incision; therefore, it is necessary to extend it to your angle, as well as the copper, and if you cannot hold it at your angle, then use nails, and then the copper.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they overshoot three hours, and what is outside the rod is inflated, let it remain until the abscess is calmed, and scrape lightly; and if the copper as you can move, and guard from the part of the rod, it will not harm him.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cure therefore the wound of things powdered plague, that we have said or treat the powders, and if it is dealt with excessive care, and it goes above, it will not harm; cure therefore as we have said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	Retention of urine is caused by obstruction of the stone, or of blood congealed, or of bowel, or of charred, or of similar things that we have said in the division; and if the urine is not released, and you see that the retention is due to the stone which is high or close to the bladder, then it is necessary that the pain be raised above its knees; and its feet are placed on the back, and its belly is stretched from the part above the back, and the pain is restrained as much as possible; and therefore the bladder is pressed against the stone above, for which reason the urine is released, and if it does not come, as we have said, and the pain is great, then you must administer extraction with all the instrument called «siringue», of which this is the form: and it is made of thin silver hair, like the pen of an eagle; and it is made of a palm of a half length, and subtle at the top.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And the manner of the issue of urine is such that you take a double thread, and tie the head of the wool or cotton to the pocket, and push the head of the thread into the tube; and wipe the excess of the wool and push it at the head of the tube, then oil the tube with oil or butter and egg yolk, and seat the patient on a chair, and remove the bladder and the wet cloth and oil of olive and vinegar; then press the tube firmly to the end of the tube, until it reaches the base of the tube, then double the tube over against the belt; then push the tube in front just above the cloth, and the patient feels the urine coming just above the empty thing, and this is not done according to this order unless because the conductor or she goes twisted; then stop the thread all along the pocket little by little, and the urine follows the pocket, then remove it, and correct the urine; and start again the tube until the bladder is empty and aligned with the patient.
des maladies de la vessie	of diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When skin or blood comes into the bladder, and putrefaction is present, and you see it drip watery and medicinal substances, then use all the instrument called «clepsedre», and its form is:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed, and has three prongs: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and the threads by which the medicine is held are such that it does not stick to the urethra too much, so that the moisture can be drawn out, and put where necessary; and when you see your medicines entering the bladder, put the tip of the catheter in the moisture, and draw it to the drawing which is outside; if you draw the moisture to the catheter, and then tighten it strongly outside; the moisture will enter the catheter, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel the pain; and this is the form of the subtle clyster with which one clysters the bladder: if it is in:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it is of silver or lead, and is the highest of the chest; and remove from the side where the ribs are broken; then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture that you see glueing the bladder, then place it between the two breasts formed by a good piece of cloth doubled, and heat the poultice over the fire; then pour the head of the poultice into the stick, then hold your hand on the bladder throughout the moisture, until the hairs feel that this moisture has come to the bladder; and if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle, and pierce it roundly around; then fill the filaments strongly with these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles the dough, and put inside what you see oil and moisture and vinegar, and tie in the instrument; and do as you have done with the bladder, of pressing with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already mentioned in the section on stones the methods of cutting and extraction along with the medicines; and I have said the difference between a stone embedded in the rain, and all the signs, and which kind of stone one should open with a drill; and in the bladder, and in the staff; and I will tell you clearly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is embedded in the bladder is more common in children, and it is a sign that the sharp pain of the bladder, like a sharp sting, is very severe; and if you have a sudden urge to urinate, it hurts greatly, and often makes them fall down; and they are often bedridden, and the cure for children under four years old is light, until they grow up, and it is more difficult for those who are between young and old.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the cure, it is first necessary to cleanse the wound with a poultice, in order to draw out all the matter that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it never fails to cause trouble when seeking the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the wound by the feet, and stand it upright and move it away from the body, so that the stone descends to the edge of the bladder, and never once rise above the thigh; then place it between your hands, clean it, and its hands be away from its thighs, so that the bladder is entirely descending down; then remove and touch it inside; if you feel the stone in the space, then hurry now to cut across the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if she does not cough up the thick phlegm at once, then gently press your right index finger on her upper lip, if the pain is sharp, or in the middle, if the pain is dull; and place it on its base, and cut into the stone, and when you feel it at your finger, then moisten the back of the neck; then press upwards, and the stone will come out where you see it was cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the servant to press the anus with his hand, and command him to extend his right hand over the testicles, and with his left hand remove the skin that is outside the testicles in the part where the incision is made; then cut the spongy tissue, of which this is the shape:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And making between what is between the bones and the foundation, not in the middle but on the side of the right nave; and straight up the stone, and your right should be at the foundation, and your left should be at the bottom, and the tail should be across so that it is wide on the outside, and narrow on the inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large; perhaps the pressure of the right hand which is at the bottom, that it may jump out without effort; and if there are pieces of stone or angles, and margins: if it is grey to be removed; and if there is a piece which is soft, like a glove, and rounded, from which the issue is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	When it is in such places where there are angles and margins, make the incision wider; and if it does not heal, then you must strain it with nails that are as thick as a lime at the head, to prevent the stone from slipping out; or you can use a subtle hook bent into the shape of a head; and if you cannot engage it in this way, then enlarge the opening slightly, and if there is no bone, then strain it with vinegar; and if there are more than one stone, then first remove the largest at the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then remove the rest, and the smaller ones afterwards.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, it should be cut to make a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For two things happen to the wound: either it kills, or the urine comes out where the legs cannot sew together; but nevertheless you try to pull it out, or tear it apart with pliers, until you tear it into pieces; and when you have completed your work, apply encaustic and aloe and dragon's blood to the wound, and bandage it, and place a moist cloth soaked in oil and wine, or oil and vinegar and cold rosewater, to alleviate the abscess; then replace the wound on its collar, and do not leave the bandage loose for too long.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you reset it, if it arises very well from the joint of oil and vinegar, then treat it with ointment and basilicon ointment until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if abscesses come into the wound and corrosions, and clots of blood in the bladder, and it is retained by the urine, which is known in a similar way as without leakage with the urine: then put your hand on the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will rot the bladder, and ruin it; then lift the wound with vinegar and salt and olive oil, and help it in all ways that you can, until it is healed; and it is necessary that all the remedies that you cure it with, that you tie the two thighs together, and gather the medicines above the wound.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the arrow is small, and it is conducted with a stick, and tied up, and the urine cannot come out; then as I said before, that you cut many times, or excuse the cutting for this cure.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already experienced this.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take a piece of iron according to this form and be at three corners tied up in one thread:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take a thread and tie the arrow around the stick outside the wound, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then lightly hit the iron on the stick until it reaches the arrow; and slowly turn the iron in your hand into the arrow until you can pierce the arrow from the other side; if the urine comes out immediately, then press your hand above where the remaining part of the arrow is inside the stick.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is already broken, and has sprung with the urine, and is sharp against the bones; and if you cannot do this for any reason, then tie a thread below the stone and another above, then make the rod at the right place between the two threads, then extract the thread, and loosen the bone, and clean the clotted blood that is in the wound; and treat it until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	of the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	There is rarely a stone in women, and if it ever happens, the cure is difficult, and is forbidden for three reasons: the first is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman well-versed who will undress herself specifically when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third way is that by chance one cannot find a woman well skilled in this art of hands; and the fourth way is that if the woman's stone is larger than the man's, because it is necessary to make a deeper incision, and there is great fear involved. And if necessary, you should send for a wise and experienced midwife, and if you cannot find one, do not proceed with the operation, but rather cast the net widely; and present a skilled woman in women's affairs, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to do what you command regarding the examination of the stone; and look closely whether the woman is virgin: then it is necessary to place her on her back and ask for the stone; and if she finds it, she should remove it outside her body, and recommend that she place it in a jar or with pain, and press her right hand firmly over the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she finds it, it is necessary that she move it from great to great from the entrance of the anus until it reaches the root of the thigh; then cut across the bone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the body where it is muddied and covered, and feel the arrow in that part; and do not move her arm above the bone or below, and let the tailor make a small opening in the wound, if you feel the arrow so sharp that the wound can be opened wide enough for the arrow to come out, and know that there are many ways of arrows: namely, small and large and sharp and blunt, long and round and rough and smooth, and those with rain.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	if you know the similarities to recognize the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if you do not know it, put the similar piece of glass in the wound, and keep it there for an hour until the pain is gone; then return to your work, until the stone is fully removed, and have the tools that I told you about in the extraction of the stone to help you in your work; and if you do not know it, and it is the artery that has been cut, put powder on the wound and bandage it with tents and bendels, and do not start again, and leave the stone and do not pull it out, lest by chance the patient might die; then cure the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is calmed, and the wound is closed, then return to your work, until the stone is formed.
de hernie carnouse	For hernia, follow this procedure:
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Watery ramice is nothing other than an assembly of moisture or white sphacelus, which is outside the curd of the cheese, which contains the whey; and it is called «sphacelus», and never is properly in the cloth of the whey, if one wants that it be another whey; and this does not exist unless not.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this ramice is due to weakness that comes to the curds, and it spreads that matter.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And sometimes if it comes from percussion on the teeth, and this moisture has many colors: whether it is declining to yellow, or without red, or black, or watery white, and there are more; and these are the signs to know this assembly, because if it is white and facial as we have said, it is the abscesses, and not long since like the figure of an egg, and does not open the teeth, because it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if it has moisture in its own cloth, it is the abscesses with part of an egg, and because one thinks it is another egg; and if the moisture is between the skin of the teeth and the white facial, then it feels good; therefore when you see the color of the moisture, try all the surrounding parts, from which the form was before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes afterwards, judge what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When we treat it with iron, it is necessary to clean the hairs according to how much power and the replenishment of its body; then place it on its back, on something a bit high, and cover it with much cloth; then lean on its right side, and command the minister to lean on its left, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs near the kidneys; then take the spatula and scrape the skin of the kidneys from long to above the knuckle, and make your incision straight in cutting the skin of the kidneys towards the white face, and scrape the skin subtly according to how much power; then pierce the white plain with a sharp and wide cut, and extract all the sharpness, and then put your forceps, and fix the white above; and do not touch the kidneys except the white itself; cover everything or even in pieces carefully the side of it subtly, if you do not cover it well, it will return to the sharpness; and if the wound opens up in your work, then reset it in its place when you have completed the work of the white. Then gather the two flaps of the kidneys at one seam, then treat it as the other wounds, until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the wound infected with another disease, it is necessary to tie the vessels that are suspended, doubting the flow of blood; then cover the wound with a bandage, and extract the wound, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	If the bone is assembled in two parts, as there are two branches; then cover the other part as you have done the first equally, then suck out the blood, and put in the wound linen soaked in rose oil; and put on top of that other linen soaked in wine and oil, and place two poultices on top, and cover with doubled cloths, and tie it over all the limb according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two cloths, and place them according to this resemblance and be assembled by sewing in the neck of the drawers, and one of the parts of the patient's back, and the other at the part of the little finger; and the other head above the two angles, and everything assembled is restricted in the loop of the drawer; and never is this branch of the cautery in the form of iron, and it is that you take one cauterizing needle, and cover the skin of the wounds, and be heated as we have said, so that the white sap that contains the poison is discovered; then take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that sap with a thin needle, and the skin with this subtle cautery clean:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And the copper in all ways that you can, until you extract everything; and guard that the feet do not touch the wound; and make sure that this work is safer; and watch out for the flow of blood, and make sure that the work of tailoring does not make any harm, and make sure that nothing goes wrong, if something goes against you, whether an abscess or the flow of blood or other harmful thing, then cure what goes against you according to what is said above.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the pain is not severe, and does not want to endure this work due to its horror, then use perforation, as I told you, and it is that when you are well certain by the signs that we have said that the sharp instrument is laid, then place the pain on the raised seat; then perforate the abscess in the part below all the spatula wide, and put the perforation down the long body; and let the wounds be wide so that all the sharp edge flows; then put cotton on the limb, and tie it, and let the remaining sharp edge flow, then treat until the wound is healed; and if the white cloth does not let the sharp edge come out of the wound mouth, then you must go with a pen or the instrument that treats the sharp edges of dropsy, because its form is as before; and expand the wound, and make sure that the sharp edge returns, and is assembled after six months or around, and when it is assembled as before, and so the pain will pass its days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of abscesses of the kidneys
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	in the section of this branch, there are many positions that cause fear in many people, so it seems to me that it is better to leave it; and I will tell you about the work and similar things.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say therefore that many abscesses come from the backbone, and even from the kidneys; and it is due to many causes.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	It is to know by excessive sharp and cold, which is spread in the kidneys, or from a blow; and the color of the abscess depends on the color of the blood; and it does not cause pain, and it is a grievous abscess; and perhaps some gray, putrid, and pus-filled abscesses, and of yellowish color, and sometimes comes from an outflow of arterial blood, or from an inflamed vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is due to an artery, it is known by the presence of a high abscess, when you press it with your fingers; and it should not be touched.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	Those who are made of opening a vein are known by their appearance with gentle touching of the fingers, and can often make a cut across this resemblance, and on other parts; and it is that you should carefully watch the circulation of blood, then stop the flow at the top, and pull out the thread from the white face, and deliver the suspended part of all parts of the vein.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the vein is already soaked with these needles, then it should be cut and cleaned; and if it is in the face, or inside the vessels, then it should be delivered completely, and cleaned roundly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the shoulder blade is the part that has not yet grown, then you must cover it all, and extract the bone, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your surgeries are complete, apply the wound with soft linen soaked in rose oil and wine, then treat with other remedies until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the groin
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is an abscess enveloped by an envelope similar to a blister, with the softening of the groin, and the pain is severe when it moves; and the treatment of this disease is as difficult and dangerous as the previous one, and therefore we will tell you the work of treating this, according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	It is necessary to seat the dislocated joint on its own, then lift the suspensory ligament of the tendons to your fingers, and all the tendons that are close to the bone, and tie them with the masters, and extend them evenly; then cut the spatula sharply across the middle of the tendons, as far as they are exposed, and then scrape each part, as we have said in the extraction of arrows which are in the temples; then take a needle or double thread, and tie it to the first limb where the blood came from, and tie it on the other end; then cut them diagonally, straight up, according to the length of the body, and draw out the corrupted moisture; then cure the wound as in the others, so that none of the tendons are torn; for by this no harm comes, and if all the tendons come out, it is necessary to pull the tendons from all the tendons; so that he does not lose his blood through the incision of the tendons, and they dry up and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	of the breaking of the tooth
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The causes of this branch are due to the section that comes from or by the tooth breaking, or the extension over the stomach in the part of the angles, because the intestines descend from that break to one of the joints; and this break is either from the tooth breaking, or from the extension of it, and these two methods of many causes are: from impact, or from jumping, or from screaming, or from lifting a heavy burden, and similar things; and the signs that indicate the extension of the tooth breaking, are that it happens little by little, in long tension, and does not come suddenly; and it is the abscesses equal to the front, because the tooth approaches the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it comes to the section of the gum, which causes sudden pain at the beginning, and is different abscesses appearing outside the skin, and it is for the end of the intestine and the heart after the section of the gum.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the entrails are torn with the intestines, and are retained inside, and cause great pain to suffer from the injury, especially when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these treatments of iron with fear, because it is necessary to avoid them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And the way of the work is that you command or fear that the intestine be wound around your hand inside the wound, if it can enter; then hold it between your hands and loosen the fingers; then place the skin above, and cover all the skin of the ribs with the long one that you have for opening the wound, as many as there are that come out; then remove the white skin that is outside the skin of the ribs, until the white skin does not show from all sides; then put your index finger in the direction that leads to the rib, between the white skin that is outside the skin of the ribs and between the second white skin, and behind the rib, and between the second white skin; and move gently with your right hand inside the skin of the ribs, and place the white skin high on your left hand, and loosen the skin over the abdomen; and command the servant to extend the skin upwards, and remove what is behind the bandage; and if you find anything, if you find any intestine or white skin, then put it in the belly outside; then take a needle or a thick thread made of 12 threads, and put it in the back part of the skin, which is after the skin of the ribs; then cover the threads with the skin, and form them into two layers, so that none of the vessels that they touch can enter, as the pus does not come out; and then place the first layer according to the first layer, and the two layers afterwards according to the roundness that the belly carries; then cover the part that is outside the skin of the ribs with the great one of a finger; and then the other according to the roundness that the belly carries; then cover in the part that is outside the skin of the ribs, as we have said before; then apply soft linen oil to the wounds, and put it on the wound, and it will be applied to the thread that we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And never cauterize the white pus that we have said after incision, due to fear of blood clotting.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this often happens, and let the wound bleed for itself; and if it takes a long time to stop, then sprinkle with hot vinegar, and put on what we have said, until it stops; then treat the wound with other treatments, until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia carcinoma
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch, I have never seen anyone who dared to perform the cure by iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients said that it is made thus as the branch which is together with the viscera, in a way that you tie the vessels, after the belly slightly above the navel; then cover it, and treat the abscess with what works, until the vessels heal; and the treatment is as we have said, until it is perfectly healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Never come a tear or anger, as we have said, and open the wounds; and let no one draw out any of the intestines, and if they do, it is little, and repair every hour; and in all ways, if it remains too long at this point, the patient believes that the pain or the intestine is coming out; and this happens by the extension of the intestine which is at the tear, as we have said, because it is extended, then it is softened and inflated the wounds and opened; and the cure is by cauterization, as we have previously said; and no cure is done in this way: and it is that the hairs are gathered together on top of their back between your hands, then cover the wound of the tear enflated according to the quantity of three fingers; and then pull out the intestine which is outside the skin that covers it, then take the right and put it on top of the wound of the tear; and press at the front of the belly, then cut the two wounds above the head of the right, and both; then pull out the head of the right, and do not cover the intestine or stretch the belly or anything else, as I have told you in the cure of the intestines; then cure by the treatment of wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the threads, remove the foreign matter and treat the wound until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The thread is strained, and does not appear to be broken, and the cauteries are quiet in this limb, and closer to recovery.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of leather of boots
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the leather of boots is softened in some men, because the charcoal inside is softened, and it can be seen; and it is a matter when one wants to cure it, that one should make the wound lie flat on its back, and cut the leather that is softened over the natural leather; then bring the two edges together at a seam, and if you see, first remove the excess soft leather at three or four seams firmly; then stitch between the seams, and treat the wound as with other wounds until it is healed, and cut the thread.
dou chastrement	For gently
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	For gently is commended in our law, and because I would not speak of it in this book; and there are only two ways: one is that the patient should answer gently when asked, and be treated gently; and the other, because we often have need to use gentleness with some animals to help us, such as a goat and sheep and cat and others.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say therefore that gentleness is done in two ways: by attraction or by cutting.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In that which we do by attraction, make the animal sit in high heat, until the sinews are softened and remain; then take them in your hand, until they are returned and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	For the chastening of the belly: it is necessary that you smear the beast with oil, and press the skin of the intestines with your right hand, then tie the suspensory ligament, and cope over each opening with a cloth, when you have well cauterized them; and leave no trace of the sharp and subtle thorn which is on the vessels; and this method of chastening is milder than that which is done by attraction, because by attraction something of the intestines may remain, by which the beast desires luxury; then cure the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	des hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermaphrodite is in two ways according to men: one is that between the two testicles, open as wide as the figure of a woman's nature, with hair, and sometimes cutting the urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other way is in women, and has a penis like a finger and two testicles.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the treatment of men and women is that you cover all the wounds and treat them as other wounds; in the second way, of men whose urine jumps through the skin of the testicles, there is no treatment.
de la tentigene	Of the tendon
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	Tendon is a wound open on the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see; and some women have it as big as a hand, and that is the treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is necessary that you clean the excess of the tentigenous matter from your hand or fingers, and wipe it lightly; and do not move too much in front, because blood does not come, then cure other cures until they are healed; and to another char that is born at the mouth of the marsh, and use, and perhaps it jumps out, and it is according to the appearance of a cow, and for this reason they call the ancient "cowbird disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	It is necessary that you wipe it as we have said about the tentigenous matter, and cure it until it is healed.
de erratique	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient that the error is when the woman's nature is not well perceived, or when the birth is small; and it is natural by birth, or accidental by disease that has come to her; or it is by charm awakened, or a subtle or sharp sorcery, and it is done in the marriage bed, or in the sides, or elsewhere; and they prevent conception, and pregnancy, and perhaps the flowers to have; and the knowledge of this is by the look of the belly.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the swelling appears close and near, it is either to you or to the right.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is a delicate and subtle syphilitic ulcer, and it is near the two lips, then hurry, and do as follows: bring your two index fingers together, and let the woman be on her back, spread her legs; then form the two lips, until the subtle syphilitic ulcer is drawn out, and is over the stopper; then take linen, and dip it in oil, and put it on the ulcer, and cover the woman with a blanket each day, so that she cannot sleep.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the ulcer is hard and spongy, it is necessary to apply a poultice similar to a leaf of myrtle.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the limb is from a horse, if the bone is crushed and broken, and apply stanching medicines such as blood, dragon's blood, incense, and an abundance of wax; then apply a large piece of clean cloth, so that the wound does not stick; and thus it should be long, and apply a tent of dry linen; then treat other remedies until it is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when in the marsh there is a horse, if it needs to be covered, do so according to this manner, unless it is an abscess.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For the abscess that is in the marsh, one should not touch it with fire.
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that without a cut usually do not close; and when hemorrhoids become old they become thrombosed; and we have said in the division the similarities of them, and the signs, and I will say here those that require treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I said that hemorrhoids and thromboses, when they are formed in the marshlands, and do not appear until sensed, can only be cured by iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those that are at the mouth of the marshlands, which can be sensed, are those that can be cured.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	It is therefore necessary to place the woman in a cold house, then stretch the arm on tenterhooks, and cut the tendon at its root, then powder with medicines that stop bleeding, such as acid and blood of dragons and incense, and similar things; then let her soak her feet in cold water for an hour, then place her in very cold; if blood flows, sit her in a decoction of sumac and scarred pomegranate skins and galls and similar things, and then take flour of wheat, and mix with honey and oil, and make an ointment on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if he becomes weak, it is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If not, apply suction cups to the back and breasts without causing injury; then take the limb, and moisten it with plantain juice or agrimony juice with old wine, and apply to the limb.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess is ready to burst, cure the limb with poultices until it is healed; and the one called "albathir" is red, and resembles the sharp edge of a knife, if it should cover it as I have said the thelul; and then cure it until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	of abscesses from the marsh
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many types of abscess come from the marsh, such as chancre and pus-filled abscess and herpes and estiomenes and fistulas and hemorrhoids and pus-filled abscess chaut, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	It is therefore necessary to tell in this treatment about the abscess chaut that comes from the marsh, which is not one of the abscesses that fill with pus; and if you know how to treat with iron, look at whether the abscess is agus at the beginning of its coming, and plain of cholor and fever, and if it becomes red see if you can treat it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Therefore do not rush to pierce it, but make the patient wait until the pain is alleviated; and then place the injured part on a chair, and have two small chairs where it leans, and rest it on its back and gather its feet to the sides of the leg; and let its knees be spread, and put its arms off its hips, and tie them firmly with a good bandage; then bring the splint against the right side, and let it be administered with the tool that opens the mouth of the wound, from which afterwards comes the form; and it is necessary that when you see this tool being administered, you check the depth of the wound, so that what enters into it does not go deeper than it should, and does not bruise the injured part; and if the tool is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the wound with bandages, so that the tool does not hurt it; and it is necessary for him to put the horn of the tool on top, and to stain the tool.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	When the abscess is open and it is being squeezed by hand, if it needs to be covered at the head, cover it with a sponge; and when the wound is drained, it is necessary to put moist lint in the wound with rose oil or dry vinegar; and place the bandage on the edge of the marsh, and place it above the marsh and above the other clean moist lint boiled in water or mustard seeds cooked; then after two hours of poulticing, until it is healed; and never lift the bandage and the wound with a poultice of boiled water and honey, and then with boiled water or roots of lis and aristolochia long cooked; then reapply the poulticing.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is sewn up in the marsh, it is necessary to avoid cooking with iron, but treat it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	The midwife is first to the birth that she knows the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs when you see the woman pressing down and wanting to smell the air: then hasten the baby to come out; therefore check that this childbirth is according to the natural figure, and is the second born with him; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press on his belly, so that the baby comes out quickly; for when he comes down from his head, the second is with him, and is cleaned of its superfluities by good cleaning; and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it never comes out of its place, and comes forth from the back or the shoulder, and the hands, or it comes up over the belly, or sometimes, and is turned over onto its own neck, and by other bad figures; so it is necessary for the dancer that she be wise and subtle in these things, and if she goes wrong from error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one must help.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the infant comes out of its head naturally, and the woman gives birth painfully, and her strength is weak, then let her sit on a seat, or the women hold her; and rub her with oil or fenugreek that has been cooked, and then give the dancer a small amount of the following form:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	and pierce the second one, and apply pressure to its angle until the moisture that is inside has been removed; and take the belly of the woman so that the child descends, and if it does not, then it is necessary to cluster the woman with fenugreek powder mixed with mustard oil; then let her inhale and expel the condition, and keep her mouth and nose closed for an hour: if this now brings down the child.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if both hands are dislocated, it is necessary to gently and gradually reset them; and if they cannot enter, then place the woman on a chair, and raise her feet up; then remove the chair from the ground, and wash the woman, so that she does not faint at the removal; and if the hands cannot enter, and the child is dead, then press the hands against the abdomen that was previously placed there, and extract the child, and reset them equally.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	from the birth of the child above its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes above its feet, it should be placed high up; then gradually turn it little by little, until it is level; then grasp both feet and extend them little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If it jumps up after crying, command it to lie down and extend its neck; if it jumps up again, God willing.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not lie down as we have said, gradually turn it little by little, until it is in a natural position.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	Then it will be lying down.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if it does not come out as we have described, take a mussel shell, and oil of sisamine, and melted lead, and grind all in a mortar; and put on the nature of the woman inside and outside this ointment, then make her sit upright until above the ribs; and when she is softened from above, make her a collar of mint, and put it on, and let it stay for an hour; then make her sit on a chair, then make her vomit and hold her mouth and nose, and lightly press her belly, for the child is now born.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	of the child's knees over its hips
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this form, place its hands gently and gently; then it should be held upright on its neck, and its legs hang down, and it lies on the bed; and gently fold its hands, and then grasp its hands above its stomach, and remove its clothes little by little, until it is cleaned from below; and if the child does not cry, take its feet and gently move its stomach upwards, then gently push your hands down; and slowly feed the child a little at a time; and command the woman to hold the child until it is born.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the issue of a child who comes out with a wide hand during
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	It is necessary to bring back the hand: if it cannot be brought back, lift the woman up and leave; if she cannot leave, lift her onto the bed and straighten her legs; then apply the muscle relaxation that I have mentioned; and if she does not give birth, sit her on a chair, then study how to bring back the hand; and when the child is born, shape it according to its natural figure, and make it sneeze, and command that it be pinched until the baby cries.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	of the issue of a child on its back, and has spread its hands, and its face turned towards its mother's back
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	I advise that the patient soak their hand in water, then turn it gently and lightly; when it is even, place on the muscle-like substance of olive oil and honey, as we have said, then command them to move it gently; when you have done this, seat it on a chair, and command them to sit; and spit out.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In the same manner, for all the other joints.
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it comes to doing this for all the other joints, bend the joint to your elbow, until the moisture is drained; and if it can be bent over its face and neck, cover it with a cloth, so that it is not held back, and die the child; then push the child inside, until you have placed it as it should be, and command the woman to sit once: then it becomes even.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the discharge of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Saied that twins are born many times, and sometimes not at all in their birth; and this is not a strange thing, and it often happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	It is a strange thing, and they do not live if they are not named; I know that they are multiplied, and they are separated by the umbilical cord which connects them, which is like a belt; and sometimes they come out naturally as one or two at a time, just like we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they come out harshly, as the care we have said, and if the afterbirth is subtle, and do it soon and lightly what it does; and do so that it is worth moving to save.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	There are no cases where they are formed in the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, or even more than fifteen years old, and all are formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of the wise one, and it is fitting that the baptizer should do everything, because perhaps similar things happen to him; if so, do according to what is fitting.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you care for the woman of the dead child or belly, if as I have said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are forced to use manual work; if it is fitting that the woman is of sound virtue, and has no accident or she fears death; then the woman should be laid on her back, and her legs raised; and the minister applies two fingers, or she is tied to the bed so that she is not treated by the expulsion of the child; then rub the mouth of the child with moistened oils and muskills of althea and fenugreek seed, and semen of linseed; then apply the hands of the midwife with these oils and muskills; then pour them lightly into the mouth, then give her a draught of whatever is suitable to her, and if the child appears to be expelled above his head; if it is not expelled, place the fingers in his eyes or on his neck or in his mouth or in his palate or behind the beard or in the forehead or at the sides of the chest, and if it is expelled, place the fingers on the sides of the middle; and it is fitting that the midwife ties the cord to her right hand, and places the forceps between her left hand, and pours all over her hand lightly, and apply the fingers in any of these ways until the thing comes out empty; and this is the form of the child:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then flip to another one, where the doctor has skill, so that the extraction is equal; and then place it equally by moving from one side to the other, to help it move, and keep the teeth together as before.
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if a part remains, use some of its own oil, and put it in that part, and pull out the other part; and if it does not remain, place this bone or higher up on the shoulder, and do this as much as it can come out completely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be brought back by pulling, then you must wrap it around the wound, until it is completely out; then cover it in the joint of the foot or at the heel, and so you must do in the other hand, and in both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the child is large and stiff at the neck, or has a sharp knot, it is necessary to beat the spatulated bone between your fingers, and make the knot and straighten it; or you can break it with an instrument called «almidach», from which the form comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this one; and thus also do for the child's head naturally; and then pull the bones with pliers, and if the child's neck is stiff and held, if it is cut, until the blood issues; and if it cannot issue, then cut it in pieces as you can; and if it is swollen in the belly or outside the ribs, it is necessary to prick it until the blood flows.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is hanging by its feet, then light traction is applied, and the marshmallow is gently placed in the mouth.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if the child is stuck in the stomach or in the groin, it is advisable to extract it with a cloth wrapped around your hand; and after uncovering the stomach or groin, as long as the moisture that is there is removed. And if the other limbs are broken, and the child remains, then you should wipe the mouth with a marshmallow, and pull it to the mouth of the marshmallow; then wait one or two minutes, and pull it out. And if the mouth of the marshmallow is retracted due to an abscess that has formed there, it is not necessary to force it, but rather to administer moist and greasy things; and the ointments are applied, and the scar is treated with hot, softening and moistening agents.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the bone is above its shoulder, and you can put it back in place, as we have said for the living child; and if there is no way to do so, then treat it by breaking pieces, and leave nothing of the second joint.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, treat it as we have said for abscesses that come in the marsh; and if blood comes out, then put it in high restriction, and treat with other cures.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	I saw a woman in whose womb an infant had died, then consulted another doctor about it, and he also died.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, some abscesses appeared in the groin, and they grew so much that they burst, and then began to cause great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to the cure, and I thought for a long time, and could not sew the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied strong adhesive, and it pulled out some bones, and after some time, others came out.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was very surprised because the belly does not have any bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought that it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I looked at the wound, and there were many bones, so much that the woman was not in any better condition; and I saw the woman for a long time like this, and it was only a little blood from the wound; and I had not remembered this chapter before because when masters find an unusual thing, they do not know how to help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	bring the marble back to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	and then comes the form of pressure, by which we apply books; and to return to the previous question of the two joints.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	However, the corners should be more subtle than the restraint, and made of flat or wooden material; and the mouth of the pipe should be two fingers wide, and the margin of the trees should be one palm and a half long; and in the two joints, they should be two stoppers of this same pipe, which should be firmly placed on both sides, half a palm or more long; and these two stoppers are inserted into the mouth of the marble when turning the two corners.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, should be made of an ebony or boxwood rod, according to the appearance of needles; and it should have two prongs, as you see, about one palm long, and two wide; and when you want to open the wound all the way with the instrument, place the woman on the bed, her feet together and her legs apart, then push the two prongs into the wound, and hold the head of the instrument between her teeth; then work your hand with the instrument, as you would with needles, according to the quantity that you want to open the mouth of the wound, until the bail does what it wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	These instruments are all surmounted by a handle, and they have many similarities; and when the one sees them matched, the more sharp the work, and the higher it is to men for their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not despise the instrument because you have not matched it, for its need is not excuseable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the second instrument is held to the childhood, it is necessary that you command the pain that it retains its saliva, and then make it spit out the condition, and hold your hands to the mouth and nose; and if it sneezes through this, well.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If not, take a pot, and make or prick holes in the lid, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the marsh, such as rue, anise, camomile, cassia, and centaury; all these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked or boiled over the fire; then put a cloth or poultice of pot in the mouth of the marsh, and the other chief in the mouth of the marsh, and let it steep until the vapors come into the mouth; then make him spit, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second attempt fails.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if it remains after this cure, and is not much better, command the bath attendant to moisten her right hand with wheat oil or musk oil, and then put it in its natural position, and try the second attempt; and when she finds it, grasp it gently and extend it straight, so that the marsh does not crack during extraction; but move it slightly to the right and left, and then pull out; it will come out and dislodge.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the wound in the gum is narrow, we have said the cure of expectoration and fumigation of herbs; and if it is not all that we have said, then guard that you do not follow the advice; but it is better that what is at the wound in the gum, that you tie it to the cheek of the woman, then cleanse it with the ointment tetrafarmaçon; so it will heal and return, and be well. However, when it heals if there comes a bad smell to the stomach and head, and causes pain.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	Therefore, it is necessary to use fumigations such as: none of the ancients have experienced fumigation of cresses and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument used to fume the woman during retention of flowers and the secondine is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it is of glass-like appearance like a hook, and one places the head subtly in the fire, and the sparks are placed over the fire; and the fumigations are done on the charcoal, and the tine is used until it is burned out, and then another one is started.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Some children are born who have not pierced the foundation, but it has been stupefied by some subtle syphilitic infection; therefore, one must then apply a blister to that spot, and do not pierce any more with the sharp instrument, and keep the bandage away from touching it; then place on the wound moistened with wine and oil, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not set, place or sprain a bandage on it, and let it rest for a while, and it should be stretched as the child wants to go into the rooms.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And never come such swellings of wound infection or abscess; if cover the wound: if cured, as we have said of the bandage of bread.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the deep fistula foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that come from below the foundation are nodular, and thicker than those that come above the foundation, or in the space of the two parts, if there is one fistula or more; and when this nodule is old, it works, and becomes moist with white or subtle pus, and never these fistulas persist; and they are known by the fact that there is outflow or ventosity when the pain makes an outflow, and perhaps some verses.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that perforate the bladder, and perforate half of the urethra; and they reach the joint of the hip, and perforate out of the cow.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus one knows the fistula passing through the base, and not passing: and it is that you should bore your second finger or base, and insert a thin needle of silver or iron into the fistula when there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if it has twisting, if you insert a thin tent of cloth, or horsehair, as long as you feel the tent or hair at your finger; and if you do not feel it, and there is no perforation, egestion, or ventosity, as we have said: cut so that it does not perforate more; then hurry to cure it.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is located near the bladder or near a urinary tract, if it allows urine to pass through, and cannot be healed by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is located near the ribcage, then the tendon comes from the limb; if there is no twisting and the location of the pain is not clear, it is because it is inside, and there is no cure by medicine or cauterization; and in these persistent fistulas, there is no cure but labor and vanity of those who try.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In the one that is not persistent and not ancient, with hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the pain is hidden between your hands on its back; and the legs are raised up to its knees, and its knees are bent towards its belly; then drive a tent of tin, or lead if there is twisting, until you remove it.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the pain is felt around the base, then you should insert your second finger, as if you are feeling for it; and if you sense between your thumb and index finger the swelling or the bone, then cut through it so that it is permanently healed; do not labor too much if it cannot be cured.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	It is said that one can heal many things, but this is rare; and the aid that is done is that one heats the fine cauterizing tool according to the width of the fistula, as it has been said before; and one puts it all through the fistula, until it reaches below the base; and do this two or three times, until you know that these charred pieces are removed, which are similar to a splinter of wood; then the cure of moist wounds is applied, as long as those charred pieces are not removed, then the cure of ointment applying char and sealing.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If it is thus healthy, it is well.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If otherwise, nothing else can be healthy; and if it is between, and does not perforate just where it is based, and between your hand and the tent a thick covering of felt or syfac, and you see the fistula leading to the covering of the wound; if the copper at the beginning of the fistula, and before the tent, and then the cautery after, until it comes to the top of the tent; and it will be delivered from the tent, and closed; then clean those charred parts that seem like a quill of a goose, and none remain.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if you cannot remove it, and cut between you and the work, then cauterize with fire or medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For the fire cauterization assembles two things: it is to know, the burning of these arrows stuck, and the stopping of blood and the separation of moisture; then cure tents boiled in butter or crushed chocolate, until the wounds are poured out, and the arrows are removed from the wound; then cure the wound of the injuries soaked in strong charcoal, and these medicines are dry.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is healthy and does not return again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes from the base, it is distant from the body, and if you press on the top or base, and ask what it is.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the tent, and between them is the thread or the syringe or the charcoal, where it is close to piercing, if there are no other remedies except hope and faith, by the administration of one of the three methods: whether you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut just above the base, or if you can put tents and cure as in the first; and do not move too much in front, that you do not cover the part that holds the base, and the excretions come out through the sense of volition; then cure it, as we have said; perhaps it will be healed, or you remove that covering and clean it after it is cut below the base, or by a tent or other instrument appointed; then clean the char that is in the wound, as much as you can; then study to restore the wound, and to hold the fistula in the part before the base: if there is a lighter thing to the pain.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And sometimes fistulas are made in this manner: and when you push the tent into the fistula, it is often costive with the foundation below the skin above, so take a tent perforated at the head according to this form:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And push the thread into the second, and push the tent along the entire thread into the fistula until it reaches the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is not found at the edge of the foundation within, then pull out the thread of that which is perforated, so that you push your second or foundation; and take the head of the thread, and bring together the two parts together, and hold one against the other, and let it remain for a day or two; and do not hold it again until the thread covers those that are between them and heal; then cure the wound until it is closed and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not perforate, then I will perforate it in all ways that you can, unless it is too painful.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it does not suit to make the application so painful if it is too painful, and then cure as we have said until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The form of the spongy tissue that is made into a fistula is very sharp and pointed on one side and cutting; and on the other part, not, because we do not want to cause more harm than necessary, as you see here.
des emorroydes	from the emerods
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Emorrhoids are of two kinds: either they are within the fundament, like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and in cutting them, blood flows; and there are many, and one or more, and they are under the fundament and at the top of the fundament. But those that are under have little moisture, and in cutting them, there is a little bit of sharp or yellow bile or a little bit of blood, and they have the color of the flesh; and the cure for those within the fundament is that you command the patient to urinate through another chamber, until the fundament is cleansed, and the child appears; then you hasten, and grasp them with tweezers, or hold them at your finger, then cut them at their roots; and if the threads cannot hold them because of their moisture, you take them to a towel, or a cloth, or a piece of linen; and tie them in both hands, then grasp and powder with any hot powders that are in the cautery; or cauterize them as it is said in the book of cautery, and cure them with other cures until they are healed. And if the fundament cannot come out, you apply a rough and sharp paste to clean what is inside the fundament, so that it can come out openly; then grasp them at your finger or with tweezers, and cut them, then cure as we have said until they are healed, and do not fear the incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary to stitch the wound in this manner: take a thread of twisted hair, and make it into a needle, then pull the thread from above and pierce the needle from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread away from the needle, and if it is too wide; and straighten the thread formally, then pull the thread, and pull out the needle, and do so with all the others, and leave one to let the excess blood out; then put above the wound a piece of linen cloth soaked in rose oil or salve, and put above the wound, and instruct the patient to rest; and then let him rest until they are healed, and when they are healed, treat them with ointment and other treatment until they are healthy.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	dryly and firmly at the foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	often occurs in the intestines due to constriction of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine is not helpful.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary that you reset the shoulder to the point of a spatula or at your angle, which does not allow moisture; then cure it as it should be while it is dry; and if it cannot be cured, then begin the cutting more forcefully than before until it is healthy, and let it be scarred; then cure it until it is healed.
dou fremit	dryly
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Mice are a small appearance found in the chest, and it goes very deep; and sometimes they find the source, and one feels like a fever, and it spreads throughout the body, and more so in the hands than other parts.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the cure is that you take a needle of a goose feather, or a pen of a vulture very strong, and put that needle on the fever, until the circle around the fever encircles it completely; then turn your hand all around the needle until you cover it all, and push it deep, and extract the fever from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, if you make a needle of iron or steel in this form, and it is thin from below and thick above:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	For the patient does not feel pain, to hold it at both ends, and press it; and if you see, then cauterize the heat, as it is before or in the chapter of the cauterizer.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the cauterizer
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	No one has ever made a cauterizer of silver or bronze, or melted copper or wire; and no one has ever made any of these small and large instruments, according to those who will use them.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Therefore, those that are used in the care of children and those who are weak and painful, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the small cauterizer is above wide, or the belly is tied as follows:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And if there is a disruption where the belly is tied, as you see, and the wound is in the middle perforated; and there are two perforations on one side and one on the other; and the belly or the person puts medicines in a beast's bladder or parchment, and there are small perforations all around, and there is a space of one finger between each perforation, then fill these perforations with a strong thread twisted into an X or spirally, and gather the belly as if it were a goat; and when the medicine is inside, if the wound is facing an instrument before a strong thread, then clutterize; and this is the form of a circle.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and oil the head of the poultice with oil or butter or something similar, then press it lightly; then the nurse gives the patient's two hands together, as much as possible, until it is all visible, then remove the poultice, and relieve the pain in his legs at once, and if the swelling wants to come out, if it can; and if he sleeps a whole night, it is greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you apply the poultice in a disease of diarrhea of the belly, and the patient wants to expel it, then restart it as long as it is healthy.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if they are stuck at the base or in an abscess, then the poultice should be as delicate as for a child; and this is the form of the delicate poultice above where the skin is stretched:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We mentioned the treatment of wounds in the division; now we will tell you about the treatments for hands and medicines, according to completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are different depending on how they are made, and depending on the limbs or wounds that are made, and for what reason they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things by which wounds are made are by being pierced with a spear, and the cut of a sword or dagger, or lance or staff or siette, or similar things; or they are made according to the parts of the body, such as wounds that are made above the neck, or on the head, or on the foot, or on the belly, or on the liver, and similar members; and I will tell you about the treatment of each wound, and I will begin with simple wounds to the head, because its chapter will come later.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	When a simple wound comes or the bone is not broken, be careful if it is from a penetrating object or similar things, and if the skin is completely torn and is large, and you doubt lightly of abscess: if you do this soon, clean the wound itself immediately if there is little blood from the wound, and on the other hand, clean the part that is not affected; and avoid the evils of overeating and heavy food.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he does not want to clean, let him eat light food, and do not drink wine, and do not change his diet; and put on the wound, if abscess comes, cotton moistened in rose oil only, or in sterile wine; and if there is no abscess, put on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not moved by air, powder that I will say a little later; and if his arm has been moved, put on some ointments, until it is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like a sword cut and similar, and the lips cannot come together due to swelling, then sew them together, as I will say in wounds of the belly, by stitching.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is exposed to bone and can be moved but only held by a small piece, then cover it with a bandage; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin, and command the patient to eat soft foods, such as tests and cooked grain, like chickens, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you have a bruise or a piece of skin that is not attached to the bone, then cover it all with a bandage, and pour in warm water, then treat it; and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, without cutting, and it cannot be stanched by medicine, then tie the artery, and if you have a piece of skin that has come loose, then tie it with a thread; and if this does not help, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and you should put this powder which boils as soon as the wound is moved.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the way of the powder is as follows: take a part of incense; dragon's blood two parts; live chalk three parts, and the powder finely ground, and fill the wound, and hold it together until it sets well and joins all its edges; then bind it tightly, and leave it unloosened if it does not swell; for one should not remove the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And one should never use chalk alone when one does not have incense or dragon's blood, but that the wound is moved.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound has moved, immediately put this powder on it; but instead of any other ointment, use some made of flour of barley, with honey and water, until it heals; then treat with other cures until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if a broken bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with fine tweezers; and I will tell you about the main fractures later.
de la plaie dou col	of the neck wound
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and the main fractures, but if the neck nerves or the artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is a bone, there is no other method than to let the care, and not put anything restricting, because it hurts bones and makes them retract; and do not put anything sharp on the wound, for the substance of bones is cold, and its continuity is with the brain, which is the highest member; but rather use gentle medicine, such as chalk washed in cold water, and mixed with rose oil, and the cloth washed in cold water, and other stones of this manner, and moist cloths.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then use bandages and treat it until it is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	If the wounds are deep and the bone is exposed and full of pus, then perforate or go deeper to the bone; if the artery is cut, and blood flows, then cauterize the wound, and bind it, and cauterize the wound as necessary; and if the spine of the neck is cut, or the muscles, and the conductor is preserved, by which the meat goes, if the cut is above the backbone of the neck, and do not touch the neck but return it according to its natural shape; then gradually tighten, and leave it for some time, then treat the wounds with ointments until they are healed; and if the wound has made an impression in the bone, then remove it; and if there are pieces of bone, remove them all if you can, and those that you cannot, leave until the wound is ready to close, and align the outlet; and if the wound is fresh, powder on top of the powder that I have mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if he has bone in the wound and there is a fistula, then follow the treatment as I have described in his chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound from an arrow or a dagger
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a wound from an arrow or a dagger, and the wound is deep, look to see if the hairs around the wound are standing up: cut them then, as the wound is mortal; and if it is not deep, and it is fresh all over with blood, do not put powder in the first hour for the blood that it does not settle immediately, and return to the heart, and close the wound; but put attractive ointment on it twice a day; and if you do not have ointment, put old cotton in the wound to draw out the moisture, and make the wound sleep over the wound for three days, or four, or more; then there will be no spasm, nor trembling of the heart from anything else; and when you see good dispositions, cut that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Cure the wounds of tents and other injuries, as long as they are healing; and if they cannot heal, and work, then perform surgery to create a fistula; if the cure is as it should be.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from an arrow or sword cut, and it is simple, or more or less on the back, then cure it as it should be; if it is large, stitch it up; if it is small, apply powder, and if it has pierced bone and there are pieces, remove them if they are necessary; and if they are not necessary, let the wound rot, which will help with extraction; and for other wounds to other limbs, use judgment as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	belly rupture
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	1. Belly rupture is great and medium and small; from the large wound, the intestines or the nerves of the intestines may escape, by which the infiltration of air occurs; and the wound is more painful, and the small wound is worse than the large one, because one should not put the intestines back without putting them back correctly; for the intestines swell quickly when they feel the cold, if they are put back incorrectly, and because the medium-sized wound is worse, because one must suture the intestines to their place as with other II And there are four ways in which the belly rupture occurs: the two common costures are in the belly wound, and the costure of the other wounds of the body and two other costures are common to other wounds; and all of them are more appropriate with the belly wound, and I will say one by one and explain.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small, and nothing of the intestine is injured, and it is easy to replace, it is done by one of the two methods: either by the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen from the cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, warm it in this manner: moisten a sponge or a handful of dry hay, or cook it in hot water and wine and salt until the intestine swells; and never do this by force, and it is better to wait until it softens.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling departing, if the intestines are moist or wet and misshapen, because by this they are aligned and enter soon; and if it cannot enter, make a small incision with the instrument with which one removes tumors; and the first care is to stop the bleeding, as we should not cut without great necessity. And this is the instrument for cutting: slice from within the belly and outside, and remove the shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines jump out, if you can put them back in their natural form according to their own place, it is good.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is large, and it is in the part away from the belly, it is necessary that you place the injured side on top of the patient's back, and raise their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the part away from the belly, then raise the head and the worst part higher than the other parts, and thus manage as I said for large and medium-sized wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	For small wounds, apply what is appropriate, then insert a needle or more, depending on the size of the wound, leaving about an inch from the edge of the wound, and sew it with strong thread; then pierce the two layers of skin with the two needles, which are outside the skin, until you make a hole in that part, and bring the two needles together four times; then tie a double knot around the needle from both sides, then evenly sew the edges of the wound, leaving about an inch, and insert another needle; then tie the thread as you did with the first needle, and do not stop doing this until the entire wound is closed; and let the needles be medium-sized, between thin and thick, because thin needles cover the whole wound, and thick ones cannot enter well: therefore, they should be medium-sized; and do not insert the needles too far from the skin and flesh, so that they do not cover and open the wound before sewing; then cover the edges of the needles, so that they do not stick to the injured part at night, and put bandages or cloths on the edges of the needles to keep them in place, and leave them until the wound is sealed; this method of sewing with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because it can be done with one needle or two, the second stitching method is common, and it is that you bring together the edges of the skin and flesh and a needle with a strong thread; and when you have pierced these edges all together, then remove the needle from the part where you started, in the manner of sewing with a needle; and leave a space between each stitch the size of a small finger.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I brought back the intestine as it had been for 24 hours, and the wound was dressed after 15 hours, and it was treated, and it was healed.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And the mother thought he would die, and it was a miracle; and I did not treat him with anything, as I was in a place where none were found, nor any medicines; and I put cotton soaked in honey over the wound twice a day, and washed it with vinegar until it was healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Or I will tell you the two main ways of sewing: take the needle and the thread from one side to the other through the inside; when it has pierced the middle correctly, place the head of the suture or stitch where you have put the needle, and pierce it from the other side through the inside on the other side; and the understanding of this sewing is that you sew as the furrier does the skins, and that you leave once the suture of one part, and repeat it on the other, until the whole sewing is completed.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second method of suturing, which Galen properly calls, is such that anyone can do, who assemble the two parts together naturally, and apply one of the main threads to the other head, in this manner: stick a needle or thread near the wound, and make it pierce that part alone, and leave the two ends of the wound; then turn the needle, and make it pierce from the front part inside, both ends of the wound, in two other threads that are on the other side. And this is the easiest method of suturing and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galiens says this word, and no one testifies to it, that one should sew the belly with two needles, or there is thread in each; and one needle must be inserted from one side, and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew corroies; and that when the tear is in the belly, the sewing is more painful than other stitching of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds: and it is that when you have probed the fresh wound to its full depth, and if the doctor has moved it, then remove the intestine and the lint; then put on powder infused with charcoal, and if the doctor has moved it, then apply any ointment present until the wound closes; then bind the cloth, and be careful of the sifac and the mirach; then treat the wound as the others, until it is healed; and if you do not have medicines, as soon as it begins to close, use cotton wool, and move it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For in many positions of the wounds, there is no other medicine besides simple ones; and if you doubt that the wound does not communicate with principal members, then it is necessary to apply a light oil of temperate warmth, or rose oil, and put it around the wounds, and smear it on the bones; and if it feels pain or pruritus in the belly, and often happens, then clysterize with black wine, and immediately if the pruritus comes to the intestines; and pierce from within, and scrape what is inside, and what is inside the large intestines, it is lighter to heal than the small ones.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestines that are called "jeun" cannot be healed when they are raw, and this is due to the thinness of the veins that are in them, and due to the subtlety of the whole body, and the proximity of their nature to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the intestine jumps out of the wound, put it back in as the intestine, while it is fresh; and if it is old and turned to black, then you must tie the black limb that is there, so that blood does not come out, for there are veins and arteries; then cover what is between the liver, and put the two needles hanging from the part outside the wound up to behind in order to align the extraction when the intestine falls, and the wound closes.
de la routure dou boueil	of the breaking of the boil
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is punctured, and the wound is small, it can be restored to some men, because I saw that one man was gutted or stabbed in the belly; and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and became an abscess and fistula, and inside there were excretions and ventositez; I made care according to what I could, and did not cease to subtilize until it was healed, and the legs sounded.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw it healing, I doubted that the pains were not in his belly; but there was no pain, only it delayed in better dispositions, and drinking and eating; and some experienced people said that when one has a small wound in the intestine, it should be tied in such a way: take a hot iron, then gather the lips of the wound, and when the hot iron has opened the mouth, put it on top of the two lips, so that it holds its mouth above; then cover the wound, and hold it in such a way that it cannot slip, then put the other hot iron after in that manner before, until the wound is completely closed; and over the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	If the bone of the shoulder is broken inside the body, and no harm comes to the hairs, and it can be sewn with a thin thread that is taken from the intestine of an animal, in this manner: take the end of the intestinal thread that is very dirty, and then tie it to the end of this thin thread, then pull the thread through the needle, and through the intestine, and sew it in the wound; and this way of sewing is not far from the way of faith and hope; and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the hollow intestines, there is no remedy or cure, except for its subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a fistula or that it is
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	that all wound or abscess, when it is covered, is universally called "fistula", and specifically when it is cut and opened.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And a fistula is according to its hard and white tissue, where no pain is felt, and it is cut as thin as the quill of an eye; and sometimes it is clear and sometimes thick; sometimes small, and sometimes enough; and I have spoken of it in the division of wounds, that any wound that is not healed, and there is no pus, except for one of the EIGHT causes: that is to say, by the smallness of the blood or flesh; or by its malice; or because there is hard pus inside, and on the lips, which does not allow new pus to be born; or there is too much pus; or the wounds are poisoned, and the matter is of bad quality; or the medicine is not good in the cure; or because the corruption is a form of plague; or because the property in the region is late digestion, and late health, and escapes by nature; or there are veins or bones: and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	It is necessary for me to tell you about the treatment of fistulas that is done by handwork.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Fistulas can occur in all parts of the body; for there are fistulas that come from large veins, and from arteries, and from nerves, or at the syphilitic sore, or in the intestine, or in the bladder, or in any of the ribs, or in the spine of the back, or in any joint of the hands or feet; and if they come to the property of the main member, and similar ones.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	All fistulas of this kind are of great difficulty in healing, and there is only labor and ignorance; and if there is any fistula that does not come from the part I have mentioned, and you have confidence in the cure, and you know how to treat it, take a lead or iron tent, if the fistula is straight, if the quill; and if the fistula is twisted, take a subtle tent of linen, for the linens do not stick to the twists; and if the fistula has many openings and you cannot well cover it with tents, cut it through one of the openings, for the moisture does not come from one opening to another, and cleanses it; then treat it properly to your power, that you know whether there is bone or nerve, and if it is well fastened in place, and ask well of the pain he feels when you press with your hand, and where he feels it; and when you will know truly the place where it is, and whether it is far from joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or in any of the places I have mentioned, cut according to what I have told you, and remove the cause and the corrupted flesh that is inside; and then treat it until it is healed, and if the fistula is deeply placed in the right place, it is necessary to cut as much as you can, then put soft tents in medicine ague, and pour them in at the top of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the superfluous part that remains at the bottom; and then put clean ointments on the wound, as long as it is healed; and if it is not healed by this, cauterize as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted from the fistula, cut.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If the vein or nerves cause pain or damage to the main limbs, as we have said; and if the tooth is exposed, and there is corruption and blackness, then remove all the corruption until it is completely removed, then treat the things that have been injured with charms for as long as they are healthy; and if they are not healthy, and remain in the same way as before, then do not go further: if it is exposed and wants to be taken out as far as you can, and remove all the corruption, then restore the limb; and if it is thus healthy, it is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If not, then it is too far in, and you cannot reach it; if there is no other method that is less painful to nature; and if there is a small bone corrupted, and you can pull it out with forceps, if it is extracted with the appropriate instrument, and if there are many bones, then remove them all, and do not leave even one; and if the moisture makes it against you, and there is no error or fear, if you copper and moisture and charm, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	If you cannot remove them within an hour, place something soothing on the wound, and leave it until the flesh is completely rotten around the bones, and then they will be more easily removed; and if it is a large bone, such as a leg or thigh, raise the dead flesh as far as possible until the entire bone is exposed, then cover the wound; and if there is a great part of the corruption remaining, and comes close to the bone; if it does, cover it completely with the corruption, and treat it as best you can until it is healed; and I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you may take example and help in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	The young man was around thirty years old, who had pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body, so that the matters came to the leg, and he was inflamed with a large abscess, and there was no cause to open; but the midwife by their folly opened too high that the abscess opened, and they poured out much matter, and became a fistula, and there came much pus from the body; and many more sought cure within two years, and there was no healing in the art of hands, so that I was called, and saw his leg and the medicines with which they were treating him, and what was coming out through the openings was great pain to the young man's body; and his body became red from the young man's age, and had a yellowish color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I pitched a tent in one of these gaps, and then I searched all the gaps, and found that one was coming against the other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I then hurried and cut into one of the gaps until I discovered a part of the bone, and found it rotten and perforated, and the corruption was coming to the bone from within; I saw that the rotten bone appeared to me, and thought there was no other corruption except what I had seen; and I began to treat the wound with various remedies for a long time, but could not heal it; then I returned, and discovered the bone as before, and found the continuous corruption in the bone, and saw it, and then removed it, and I was unable to heal the limb; but I could only cut around a palm of the bone, and treat it all over its length, then I treated it with remedies; and it became healthy and healed quickly, but it did not want to continue the work except for the weakness of the pain, which could not bear it, and the fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	Because often for the evacuation of blood, but he was completely healed, and born in the place of the bone a hard horn, and was of good disposition and had no harm or contrary effect at all, neither to the former nor to the latter.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be done in this way: take a thin strip of cloth, and stretch it at the head of the bone that opens, and command that it be extended upwards; and put another thicker strip of cloth than the first strip, on top of the horn that is above the bone, and extend the head, so that you remove the rotten horn from the outside, and uncover the horn above the place where you see that it should be, so that it does not corrode the horn; and put a bandage or a cloth outside the bone to cover the rotten horn; and it should be done in such a way that one can see and feel the corruption, and it should be done again another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	If the tooth is rotted and does not open, and the decay is in the middle or in one part, then remove the entire crown; then apply the wax to the other part, and slowly fill the corruption from one part to the other, as we have said; and if the decay is in the joint, then cover the corrupted joint, and sew the bone or it contains on the other side; and if the decay is in the continuation of the two joints, then there is no other way than to cover; and if the decay is at the tip of the hand or the tip of the foot, then this thing is very difficult, but nevertheless you must ask about that corrosion, how it opens; and clean it in all ways that you can, but do not let the vein or nerve make you contrary; and know that the tools for covering these bones are many, according to the shape of the bones and the appearance of teeth, and their size and subtlety, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness; and for this reason you must prepare each similar work with its appropriate tool; and know that the work will show you the tool that you have to use, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of diseases; so consider the tool that you have to use according to what it should be.
dou feu	of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The patient's member will rot either because of a pus or because of a lack; and when you have medicine for that corrosion by the cure of medicines, and it does not help, then you must cover that member until the place where the corrosion comes, so that the pain escapes from death, or from malice, which is greater, from the lack of the member; and the signs are that the member becomes black, so that it seems as if it were burned by fire, and becomes darker afterwards, as those corrosions spread from member to member, and take hold of the whole body; if you delay covering, and if it is because of the sting of some venomous beasts, such as scorpions and vipers and similar, if the corrosion is at the head of the penis, then cover it, and do not give him any space to come near his hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And if it comes from the hand, if the bandage is at the joint, so that the corrosion does not reach the arm; and if it comes to the arm, if the bandage is at the shoulder; and if it passes the shoulder, it is death, and there is no other remedy except the quantity of its power; and thus do what you can when the corrosion comes or pain: if it comes in the first joint, if the bandage after the other joint; and if it comes to the pain, if the bandage all the pain; and if it goes up the leg, if the bandage at the knee joint; and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy than that the limb dies; and the way of the bandage or the cloth the member is such that you tie it above and below, and extend some ministers one of the limbs below, and some ministers the other limb above, and uncover the bone that is between the two limbs to the width of a span, until the bone is exposed; then the bandage or cloth, and put on each part of the linen, so that the member does not touch the healthy skin, and brings the pain and abscess to the other.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And if blood flows when you are working, cauterize the limb hastily, or place some powders that stop bleeding; then return to your medicine until it is completed, then bind the wounded limb with a clean bandage, and treat it until it is healed; and I will tell you what happened to a man in such a case: he had a black wound that seemed like fire burning, and that corrosion first appeared on his face, taking over the whole face; and when the honorable man saw the corrosion, he covered the wound, and was healed; and after a while, the corrosion appeared again on his hand, and it came to me, and I placed some repercussive things after cleansing the body, and could not stop the corrosions; and he said that I would cut off his hand, and I would not, because I had hope of reflecting the matter; and he also doubted that if I cut off his hand, he would not die, for the virtue of the man was weak; and he lost all hope, and returned to his land, and covered his hand, and was healed; and I have not told you anything else except for what is necessary.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	Never comes an abscess in a lean body, and it lingers so long that it causes great swelling; then they burst and pierce, and the pus escapes, as if it were a bag; and the skin above is also thin like cloth, and does not stick to the bone, nor to the nerve, and such diseases are called "sinus," and are not called "fistula"; but if it is so long that it reaches the bone from the outside, it is called "fistula"; and the skin is such that you must cut around it, and especially when it is thin, like cloth; and it does not heal for its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if the skin becomes hard and the corruption is not yet complete, and the skin is charred, then use this ointment: look to see if the breasts are large, and the nipples smell badly, then use Egyptian medicine made as follows: take aloe, oil, and litargyr, equally, and put it in a bowl to boil in hot water until the medicine becomes red and has the same thickness as honey; then take as much as you need, and make it into a thick paste and thin paste, and apply the ointment to the breasts, and hold the nipple; leave the ointment on for two hours, then remove it by squeezing; do this many times until the breasts are clean and dry; and once a day, if there is no Egyptian medicine present, and you should take ashes of grapevine, and pour hot water over it, then let it cool, and apply the ointment, until you see that the breasts are clean; and if the pain cannot bear it, and the Egyptian medicine and the ash of grapevine do not help, then use an ointment of honey and melted wine, which has the property of cleaning and washing, and the wine makes the flesh ache; and when you have done this, and you see that the breasts are clean, then use an ointment made of rose oil and wine; or use some medicines and ointments, as I have mentioned their properties in treating wounds; and if the nipple is too small, and the clister cannot enter, then enlarge it with a sharp instrument, and put in a tent of Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment, until it is large enough; and if the wound is too large, then cover it with a cloth or bandage, wherever the clister or the breast can enter, and if the discharge from the nipple is on top, then put the bandage on the bottom.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	For when the shoulder is dislocated, do not let it hang; and if you cannot cover the back as you see fit, arrange it in such a way that the shoulder moves to the lowest part where it is, for when the shoulder is dislocated, do not let it hang, and if you cannot cover the back as you see fit, arrange it in this manner: the shoulder should move smoothly downwards, and leave nothing of the shoulder; and take consolidative medicines to put on the back, and place a linen cloth over all the back; then cover the forces at the place of the swelling slightly larger than the first, for they are tightly bound with another cloth according to the size of the swelling, and place it on the swelling to straighten the shoulder, and do not remove the large cloth until after many days once; and the one who is on the swelling often removes to straighten the shoulder, and wipe away whatever comes from the swelling, whether it is poison or a little or enough, or digested, or undigested; and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been extended in this manner and you see the nature that moves over the swelling, then wipe away that the shoulder is already healed, and approach the health; and then remove the bandage in the morning, or the next day, and when you remove the wound, change the other cloth, and renew the poultice.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast is turned awkwardly after many hours, cut it out so that the breast does not become misshapen.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons are cut after a long time, do not despair of the health, for the health approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are men who take long to heal from wounds, and those who do the opposite; and if the breast is turned awkwardly after many hours, cut it out so that the breast does not become misshapen; and if the breast delays in becoming whole, and is distant, then apply moist substances and dry remedies, such as oil of roses, and the same remedy behind the medicine; take oil of roses, and mix it with old wine in substance; then cook it and use it; and the same thing is done with honey when it becomes thick, when there is no oil of roses present, or you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind it, and make powder on the fire; and put it on a cloth, and place it on the breast, and never administer long pepper and celestial lily root, which is also like flour of wheat and centaury; and use simple or composite remedies: grind them and make powder, and put it on the honey that I have said, and use it; and if the cure is long and not cured by this cure, then cut out the corruption, and make an impression in the bone, or in hard members, or in limbs; if the cure of the cure of fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the finger
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Panarice is an abscess that arises from a small pocket of the hand, or foot, or by chance in other places; and when it is drained, and one does not take care, if the abscess comes back, and corrodes and flows so much that it reaches the root of the finger, and perhaps entirely corrodes it; and then there are corrosions up to the bone, as long as there is painful putrefaction, and the affected part is red.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help much, then it is necessary that you cut off all the remaining superfluous part of the finger, then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cauterization is a great help if the bones are healthy and the joint is sound; and if the joint is close to the skin, and begins to prick, and the wound, then it is necessary to remove the skin from the joint that does not pierce the skin, and put it above, and cover this joint subtly and gently, and put above the remaining skin burning and corrosive medicines to remove all; then care for the openings until they are healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corrosion is in the bone, then cover it and drain it, because as much as the bone rots, it cannot heal; and if you see the other rotting, then cover it with a layer of soft material as described above, and care for it until it is healed; and if it is fierce, and swollen, and it causes great pain, then it must be healed first; then cover the joint with a thin layer of soft material by cutting across it, and make sure that the cut does not reach the skin that is outside the joint, because the hairs would cause too much pain; and if it does, then put something on top to relieve.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain of the hand should be sharp
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	Those who are born with some men's hands should be all crooked, and perhaps they have bones or perhaps they have a thorn, and sometimes they have an angle, and none of them are born at the root of the joint, or in any of the fingers.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Those who are born in none of the fingers do not move, and those who are born at the joint of the finger, perhaps they move; the length of the crooked one is light, in this way: cut it from its root with a wide sawmill.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Those who are born at the root of the joint are difficult to cure: if you have the copper.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the one who is born or should be in the back, it is necessary that you first cut the flesh around the bone, then cut the bone to a suitable silk for this, then care for it until it is healed.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The similar things that come together at once come from birth, or from the healing of a wound, or from burning by fire, or from similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	If it is necessary that you cut the wound that needs to be repaired according to its natural forms; then put between two tents or moistened cloths with rose oil, so that it does not scar; or you put between two pieces of thin leather, until the wound is healed, as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	When it comes to both of its ends with the palm, it should be held as it should be.
des vils	of the evil
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	Veins are large and swollen, filled with excessive melancholy, which comes in many members of the body; and more so in the legs of those who walk and work and carry, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you should never give them any clyster of chalk, and then the healthy one from the basilisk.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The treatment of iron is according to the two methods: one is that you hold it and draw out the black blood; and the other method is that you open the vein and draw it all out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The tail is done in this way: first, the first leg of high hot water very strong, until the big without being subtly subdued, then strain the leg with the bad from above the knee to the part below the groin; then cut the vein in the thigh, or in II or III, a wide tail, then relieve and pull out the black blood from your hand, from one to the other, until as much blood can be suffered as the virtues of the bad can bear; then tie it, and command that he be stained with meat boiled with black herbs; and repeat the evacuation and cleaning when the veins are flat and no longer hurt.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The treatment of the leg according to this method: if there is much hair, shave the leg with the bad injury, then put it in hot water or bathe it, and heat the leg with hot water until it becomes red and swells the veins; if you do not have hot water, heat it over the fire, and then apply a poultice of warm cloth to the wound, or on the part below the knee; then cover the skin with grease at the edge of the wound, and scrape the skin from every part until it appears when touched; it appears red and black, and looks like a white cord; then boil out the blood until it is clear of the skin, and then bandage it lightly to the edge of the wound, then apply another poultice for three days; then scrape the skin over the wound again until it appears, then lift it to the elbow, if you have the skill, and lift it to another joint, as you did before; then apply another bandage, or more if you have the skill, then lift it, and apply to the second joint, then draw and lift to the next joint; then draw and lift until the whole is free, then bandage; and if you cannot draw and lift, use a needle and thread to pull out the blood from the wound, and turn your hand from one side to the other, as long as there is any; be careful that it does not stick, for if it sticks, it cannot be drawn or lifted, and it will do harm to the injury; and when you have treated the whole, place on the wound a linen cloth moistened in wine and rose oil; and treat until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	If the vision is blurred and twisted and surrounded together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must torture it but do not cover it; and treat it as we have previously described.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The form of iron used to cover the eye is curved and does not cut into the vein; it has a large curve, because if it were thin, it would cut into the vein, but it should be thick as we have said, and this is the form:
de la voinne civile	of the common vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is found in the legs, in warm parts where there are no herbs or trees, and in dry land where there is no moisture; and by chance it may arise in other parts than the legs, and if it comes out of the skin, as it does from within the body serpentine and winding, it should be tapped between the skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this wound are such that it comes in the leg a very large inflammation, then the limb changes, and the wound begins to protrude, like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	And if the wound is open, it is necessary to wrap around a piece of cloth from one and a half inches to two inches wide, and the wool, and leave the cloth on the leg, and every time it is not there, if the wrapping is around the cloth, and the wool; and if it is too long, cut a part, and wrap the remaining, and do not cover it at its root, until it is completely out; for if you cover it, it will go back into the body, and bring abscess and pus to the limb, and bad sickness; therefore it is necessary that it be treated little by little from the top, and nothing remains or rots; and this wound never occurs when it is treated with one or ten palms of length, and sometimes I have seen it heal in a few days, as it was ten palms long, and when you cover it, if the pus bursts or perforates, and goes to the bottom, so that everything comes out; and let the matter inside be drained, and administer medicines for pus every day, then cure it as with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And sometimes at this vein, and even when it opens into the joint of the foot, or the toe, and there is much pain, and it suddenly stops; therefore, as we have said before, do this.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	birds that hatch between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called in our land "cattle disease", because it often affects cattle, and it is a small worm that hatches between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the body, sensing well in member to member, until it reaches the skin where it went, and jumps out; and it is caused by the corruption of some humors, such as worms and lumbrics and ascarides or intestines; and one doubts its evil, for as it goes through the body, and it goes to the head, and it comes to the oil, perhaps it enters, and destroys the oil; and this has happened many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see that the patient is being cured and drawn, it cannot be done otherwise than when he goes: therefore, you must lie the limb above and away from a very tightly bound strong bandage, then cut through and remove it, and if the blood comes out in front of the char, and you do not true it, then cauterize with fire above, until it dies; and the greatest harm it does is that it corrupts the oil, as we have said; and if you see it coming or near the oil, then hold it away from it firmly, then cut through and remove it; and it is necessary to use the bandage of healing for the bodies of medicines soluble for the bad humors for the diseases.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of the pain that comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and it is a pain that comes to some members, and then moves from member to member; and I saw what I will tell you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to a sick woman, and I discovered that one of her arms was swollen, and I saw a small abscess in the vein of the arm; and soon after, I saw it rise as if a worm were at the shoulder, much faster than anything, just like live silver when it cuts through flesh; the pain departed from that arm, and went to the shoulder, and then shortly afterwards it spread throughout the body, until it came to the other arm; then she told me that she had turned inside out around the body, as I saw.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I greatly marveled at how it moved from member to member, for I had never seen this disease in this way before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	Nevertheless, I had often wanted to see how it moved from one limb to another, but I had not seen it in this way before; and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry skin, and her veins exposed, and because that appearance of constraint appeared; and it did not appear in this way to those who were delicate, and who had moist skins and covered veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see how to cure this disease, and the pain feels as we have said, if it appears as we have described, lift the limb up and down quickly, and then press on it so that that constraint of the vein is removed; and cauterize the limb; and if you do not see it at your eyes, then treat the cause of the veins, such as fetid pills, and serpent pills, and similar others.
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are various, according to their similarities and according to the types of bodies they pierce.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The diversity of them is such that there are arrows with large points, and small ones, and barbed, and blunt; and those with two angles, and those with long necks, and those with pieces; and those that pierce any member however they may: or in a principal member, such as the head, heart, liver, lungs, stomach, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When it pierces any of these members, and the sign of death, which I will tell you later, is apparent: then it is necessary to extract this arrow, for many die afterwards; and when this bad sign does not appear, and the arrow is not fully embedded, then remove it, and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the signs of the head when the arrow pierces and perforates the bone, and the eyebrow that is above the head, are blurred vision and dizziness and vertigo and vomiting and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and confusion of mind, and vomiting of bile; and perhaps it is without force from the nostrils, or from the ears; and perhaps it is impaired speech and voice; and the white discharge from the wound resembles pus, and also like boiling water, and if this sign appears to you, then hold the arrow if it has not already come out.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The signs of a dislocated shoulder when it falls or breaks, are that it is near the right breast, and feels like it was stuck in something hard, not moving; and by chance the shoulder moves like a chicken, and there is black blood, and cold sweat, and syncope: therefore, without doubt, the patient will die.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign that a wound will not heal is that without any scab forming from the wound, and the throat swells, and the limbs change color, and the patient breathes high and seeks the cool air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrowhead enters into the covering of the poor, it is beneath the small ribs; and it pours out much blood and great pain and gasping; and they move all the member of the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrowhead enters into the stomach, by chance if it jumps out of the wound nothing of the undigested meat.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrowhead enters into the belly, and it does not jump out of the wound through the intestines, there is no hope in the cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrowhead enters into the bladder, and the urine jumps out and comes out after, and the pain is very great: it is certain that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limb, such as the arm and neck and throat and shoulder and elbow and back and spine and hips and knees, and similar limbs, are safe according to many positions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not poisonous, as I will tell you what happened to me, because of what you were doing otherwise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to a man with an arrow that went through the arm into the root of the nose: I tried it, and took it out from the other side of the ear fat, and he was healed without any problem.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And in a case of an arrow that pierced through the oil paper and into the fat, and the arrow was returned, and it could only reach the tip towards the fist, and the arrow was large like a Turkish arrow, all iron without ears; the wound was healed, and no bad accidents occurred.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And in a case of an arrow that pierced through the neck of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic with ears: I cut off the barbs, and subtly removed it, and the Christian was healed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And in a case of an arrow that pierced through a man, whether it was in the neck or belly, and I thought he would die; and after he had passed thirty days without changing his condition; I cut into the wound, and pulled out, and removed it, and there were no bad accidents.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you wish to heal a man who has an arrow shot out or fell on his back, and the wound was dressed over; and the arrow remained inside, and did not change its natural positions, nor found any harm in any of its natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And another man, who had an arrow shot into his face, and the wound was dressed over; and it remained thus to suffer great pain; and many similar cases.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And an arrow was shot into the man of the king, who had it in his neck, and was slightly inclined towards the right side; and the arrow was completely embedded for three days after it was shot.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	If the wound is very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I examined it with a thin probe, and did not feel anything; but he felt pain and pricking on his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was the tip of the arrow; I put a warm poultice on his head because the wounds did not enlarge; and it appeared to me that the wounds were from the arrow.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I applied the poultice for several days, and the wound healed immediately, and the pain lasted a long time until he felt the arrow inside his nose; and he told me so.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I placed medicine on the wound, which was open, and probed it, and felt the tip of the arrowhead at the shoulder; then I poured in more medicine into the wound opening, until the point of the arrow became visible; and it passed through the end of four months, and then it began to rot; since I had pierced the wound with the tongs, and on one side and the other, and could not remove it; therefore, I continued to devise and engineer various instruments, until I found tongs made well, according to how its form will appear at the end of this chapter, so that I could extract it, and heal the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And the healers judged that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored: I restored it then, and it was healed by the wound, and the pain was completely cured.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Or I have told you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you may put your care on what I do not say, for the books cannot grasp everything; but the wise masters know well many things, and on what is present and lacking, they find new work, and new instrument, in the removal of strange things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows do not come out of the limbs except in two ways: either by the way they enter, or from another part; and the one that comes out by the way it enters is an arrow entering into its own charnas, and has never come out.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	If she does not jump now, let her stay until the charcoal is ready around her, and until the issue is alleviated; and also if she is stuck in the bone, and cannot get out, let her stay thus for several days, and move her every day; and then she will jump, and if she does not jump, then pierce all around with a subtle fore, until the bones around are expanded, and then draw it.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	If the arrow is stuck in the head bone, and goes towards one of the bellies of the brain, and any of the accidents that I have mentioned to the patient: if you do not draw it out, but let her stay until it is even after several days, for if the arrow comes towards the face, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrowhead is not stuck in the bone only, and does not come out by itself, and remains lodged for some time without causing harm, then do not try to remove it with force.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is deeply embedded and cannot be removed, then administer tar as I have told you; then treat the limb until it heals.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrowhead is hidden in the flesh so that it cannot be seen, then treat the entire wound with tar; and if you feel it, remove it with any suitable instrument; and if you cannot because of the narrowness of the wound, and the depth of the arrowhead, and there are no bones, nerves, or veins, then leave it until the wound is healed; and remove the arrowhead if you can, and if it has ears attached to it that hold it in place, then carefully cut off the part that is stuck deeply into the flesh, and then break or pry open the ears of the arrowhead, until you can remove it; and be careful not to break the arrowhead while removing it.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot at one time, place the arm around the shoulder until it is full, then pull it, for the extraction is painful.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the bleeding from the vein makes it difficult, follow what we have said about the treatment in its chapter; and guard against incising the nerve and the vein, and move as you can draw the arrow out without danger, or quickly, or tightly, or firmly; and place the wound according to the form it was in when the arrow fell out, for this is the greatest help that there is, and if you cannot, then place it according to what the signs show.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The arrow that comes from another part, where it opens nothing of it, or the skin is swollen in a place so that one can see or feel apparantly: cut then above, as much as the tongs can take, and then extract it: if it breaks now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, round your hand and push it into the bone, enlarging the bone, then remove it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot come out, leave it still, and then restart the extraction until it comes out; and if there is arrow in the bone, and you see that it is pointed, and you administer it slightly, if you administer the instrument with the point of the arrow entering the hair of the instrument; and then push further, and if the arrow is caught, pull the instrument inwards to facilitate the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	If the arrow is stuck, it is necessary to cut out all the flesh around where the poison is, if possible, then treat the wound as appropriate.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow is in the neck or chest or abdomen or bladder or ribs, and it is close, and you can cover it, if you can; do not cover the vein and nerve, then remove it, and then cut into the wound, if necessary; and treat the wound until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the arrows used to remove arrows is similar to an owl's beak, and here is the shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many ways to do it: big, medium, and small, according to the amount of blood.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the needle is like the beak of a bird, to point at the tip of the arrow, as in this way:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The shape of the hooks for putting and for holding is like this:
des voinnes dou cors communes	Veins of the common body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	There are XXXI veins of the common body, of which there are XVI heads, that is to say: two "herbech" veins that are behind the ears; and the two arteries that are in the temples apparent; and two veins that are in the arm pits of the eyes, which are called "aspires"; and the vein that is in the front; and the vein that is at the chief of the nose; and the two jugulars that are on the neck; and the two veins that are on the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins called "augeherich"; and the two veins outside the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins that are commonly opened are five in each arm: the one is to the cephalic, and is on the right side, and is called "the main vein" by the people; and the middle is called "the forearm vein", and is composed of the cephalic and basilic, and is called "the vein of the chest" by the people; and the basilic is on the left side, and is called "the belly vein", and is above the fossa, and is the one that is opened, which opens manifestly above the groin.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the salvatelle is the vein that is between the auricular and the anular, and it is on the right arm; and in the leg and where the foot is, there are three veins: the one is outside the corbeure of the groin of the right side costeit, and the second sophene which is at the knee of the left side costeit; and the vein that is called "nesse", which is at the knee of the other costei; and in the other leg are three veins.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	For the dislocation of the two arteries that are in the two temples, it is good to sprinkle with old grain, and salt, and olive oil accustomed to them; and the quality of the saineir is as I said: and it is that the hairs strangely strain their neck, so that the two veins appear openly; and it feels the pain of the throat from both sides, and then signs of inflammation; then lift the curtain over the vein at the top of your index finger, and remove the lancet from there, and lift the vein up high, and cover it, as you have done in the other two veins, and correct the blood according to your necessity; then remove the inflammation, and place your index finger on the vein for an hour, then place cotton on it; and then form a bandage, and leave it until it is healed; and we have spoken about their covering and extraction, at the beginning of this book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The cautery of the vein in the forehead is as valuable as the cautery of the cephalic diseases of the face, headache, and migraine; and the quality of the disease is such that the pain is strongest when the vein is twisted until it appears; then take the instrument called «fosseur», which has the following form:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And place the point above the vein, and hold it with your hand or something else, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you see; then release the vein from the pain, and tie the vein until it is healed and never again of a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Nevertheless, it is not necessary for the flames to be too hot; and the direction of the incision should be across, because the bone is close, and by chance it may break the flames when it is thin.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The incision of the second veins that are in the two armpits helps with the elbow, and the wrist, and the forearm, and the palm, and diseases of the face; and the quality of their incision is such that the pain is strained by turning any limb, as before; then the incision, and let the incision be across, a little long with the flame, a little wide, for there is no char.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flames are thin, perhaps it will break; then apply cloth to the blood, as much as you have skill, and then tie it with thread, and tie it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The vein of the nose is good for ague, and for fevers, and for diseases of the face, such as headaches and fainting that comes in the face, and always when it is old; and the quality of the vein is such that the pains strengthen their neck, then strain their nose to your right hand, and take the thin flame long, and put it on their lip in the space between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well by itself, and the blood will now begin to flow; and do not move too much at first, and apply cloth to the blood according to your need, then tie it for a night, for it is soon restored; and this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	For the treatment of the two jaws, it helps to narrow the alveoli, and at the beginning of meseling, and for many diseases, and for impetigo, and for corrosion, and for herpes, and for eczema; and the quality of the treatment is that the pains are strangely removed from one and the other, as we have said; and so the masters are above the chief of the pain, and the pains sit on the first seat, then clean the vein long with a little bit widely, then draw the blood tempremently, or as much as the matter is; then do another part in the other vein, then remove the ligature, and hold the veins steadily, that the pains do not strangle; and leave it just before morning, that the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	of the health of the livers
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The health of the livers above the teeth helps in chewing in the mouth, and prevents tooth decay, and cracks in the lips, and bad breath and around
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the quality of the health is to make the pain disappear in front of you, and hold its neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left, and they are known by the fact that they are black, and by the fact that around them there are small black veins: therefore match both, and if you do not know them, and if you are in doubt, match the largest of each part, and do the same for the two veins that are above and below, because it is the same way.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	of the tongue's disorder
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The disorder of the veins that are outside the tongue is helpful after the disorder of the cephalic, and it is the tightness of the throat, and diseases of the eye, and diseases of the mouth; and the quality of the saintifier is that the maladies cease between your hands before the sun, and the lieve the tongue, and look outside each side one black vein: therefore heal both, and do not move too much, for outside are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the ear that are commonly healed are healed in two ways: either by pricking at all times with a wide, sharp flame, or with a thin needle like a trephine, and is called "aneurysm"; and they are wide and thin according to the width and tightness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the fire mirror is very famous, and it is as wide as you see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it has the task of opening veins that are deeply and clearly visible, containing large amounts of blood and turbidity; and this is the form of the fire mirror.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	And it is more delicate in its application, and it is for purifying fine veins, where there is fine blood; and this is the form of the fire mirror.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The purification of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are outside the neck, and where the collarbone, and where the shoulder, and where the stomach; and it is necessary for the purifier to purge it well, and to remove the artery that is outside.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if he cuts the artery, and blood flows out, then it should be stanched, as I have said; and it should not be pricked with fire, but cut off as we do with arrows.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the basilic vein does not open clearly, then it should be pricked and changed to another; or you want any rain of blood, or you save in place of blood the blood in the arm: it opens clearly; and it is pierced with fire as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you know the place of the vein, then it should also be pricked and the arm moved until you touch the vein; then sign the vein of the entrance, and then bind the arm, and pierce the vein with fire as we have said; and beware that you do not prick in the artery when you see the vein swell, for it is the artery: avoid it then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you see blood gushing out as high as a child's urine, and the blood is red and thin, it is from an artery: act quickly then, place your hand longwise, then press on the wound without stopping, which often happens; hold the arm still, and let the bad move not; and be afraid, and do not move it until it is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the wound is not stopped, and it hurts, and the medicine is not present, if you can, close the artery if it is open, because the main part of the blood flows out; stop the wound.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And take an escharotic of figs, and make it into a paste, and take one of the halves and apply it to the other side well; if it is without pus, it is good; if not, if the cure, as we have said, with powders that stop bleeding; and the stoppings are not greasy in many positions for the small wound of the sore, and the position of the little arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The purging of the vein in the middle helps to treat blood from above, and from the body, because it is composed of the basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said; and the purger should move all the veins that are out of place, and if he does not find them too painful, and he finds the vein, and he inflates it, and the salve is greasy, and sometimes cannot heal; and this vein opens many times, and if it does not open in any man due to its subtlety, then you should use the purger with a needle; and shield the vein from your power.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	If it has veins between the two nerves, make the incision long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The cephalic vein is helpful, as it draws blood from the head, and helps with the eyes; and it should be bled by pricking at the olive oil or mustard, for this is the safest of all veins, as it does not contain any nerves or arteries.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	However, it is best to seek the lightest vein, and not cause any harm if one must do it for the first time, and then restart; and by chance, some men's veins swell at first, but it does not cause any harm.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of health depends on your thoughts.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you need to know about health is that health is maintained only to maintain health and to prevent diseases from coming; and it should be done in one of the three ways that are either costly: namely, cephalic, fasting, and basilic; and if you should heal at the beginning of praying at dawn, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the sign of repletion appears; and if you should heal on the first day or the third, after two hours or three days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The medicine that is administered for diseases does not have a determined hour or time, but rather as needed, in all hours and in all times; and it does not matter to sain the children until the age of fourteen years, nor the woman carrying except for the first four months up to the seventh.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	Neither should one administer medicine to the elderly who have passed sixty years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when anyone wants to medicate, in any way that it is, one must first clean the intestines of a light clyster, if there is much feces retained, so that the veins do not attract excess and harmful intestinal matter to the principal limbs; and one should not medicate those who are too fond of meats, or those who are full, as much as they can be, nor hydropics; and if one wants to medicate after colic passion, vomiting, and diarrhea, and frequent habitation at a woman, and pregnancy, and watchfulness and fasting, and that all the virtue, or by some thing of the arm or body; then subtly the humors, if one has the power, by foods and drinks and medicines, if one has them; then between or bath, if nothing prevents, to subtilize the blood, and to medicate from the vein the worst time around the third, as we have said; and to guard that day of work, and of pain, and of luxury, and of similar things; and to be tied and joined, and to be the medicator higher than that one who is medicated, and the flesh of the arm rub twice or three times, then raise the joint slightly with movement, because when it is too stiff or little, it cannot correct the blood; and then rub the medication on the hand until the veins swell, and the one feels on; then moisten the medication with a drop of old oil, then put its dose on its right hand over the vein of the hand wherever it wants to medicate, that the vein does not burst and fail to hit.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that flee as if they were strings at the incision, and some that are plain of their softness, such that when one puts above the flame, they draw back from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus are those; and if they open the vein, then the wound is too tight, because it must be that the surgeon is aware of these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens the first time, it is good; but if not, then one should try again a little below that place or above, until the veins are not inflamed.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the veins are inflamed, and the hairs spread out, then leave it for one or two days, and do not tie the arm: perhaps an abscess will come; do not enter or bathe, then restart the incision if it pleases; and if the wound is small, or the skin is cut subtly and you doubt that there will be as much blood as you saw, then trust in that wound itself to the flame directly; and work a little gently, also when the veins are inflamed.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the limb swelling, do not immediately restart the bleeding, and place a small amount of oil on it, as it soothes the course of the blood, and is quiet in this limb, like the oil; and thus administer the oil in every wound that you cleanse, to stop the flow of the blood; and the same thing applies to a plaster and bandage, when it is placed on the limb; if it is too thick, gently remove the blood and separate it.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if there comes a large abscess that often happens, exactly when it is not cleaned except at this time or the opening of the vein is small, then hurry, and place on the limb a soft sponge in hot water and a cloth a little thick, and hold it for an hour; and it is necessary to do this after the issue of the blood from the vein, and if it remains on the limb for any days without any blackness or greenness, then do not remove it; and if you see, place on it anything of aloes or of myrrh mixed in juice of calamint, ointment, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often there is an abscess and appearance of the wound to the soundness of the church: place your hand on it, and if you feel the swelling heavily under the pressure of the hand, then that appearance is bad.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, do not place anything that we have said on it, because perhaps you will cut the artery; but apply a dry bandage to harden the wound, then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And apply each wound according to the quantity of its virtue and the color of the wound.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the wound is black, let it bleed until it turns red; and if you see it swollen, let it bleed until it becomes thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is appropriate for one who is weak and outside, and has a job of arrow extraction, to make a larger wound, and let the flames be wide; and for one who is weak, do the opposite, and let him rest often and little, and let him be bandaged diagonally, not by pinching; and this way of bandaging is safe from the detachment of arrows and the compression of nerves, and it is better than the bandaging that is long or wide.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for one whose body is weak at the time of bandaging, it is appropriate to give them moist bread in apple cider; if they are hot, take out the arrow three or four times and apply the bread; and if they are cold in constitution, before the bandaging give them moist bread in honey mustard, or aromatic honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and strong-smelling syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he palms the wound after much bleeding, it is necessary that he take a broth of charcoal and an odorous syrup, and use the other things that we have said in the section or chapter on syncope for the evacuation of blood.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to bandage an arm, and bleed again, it is necessary that when he is weakened by much bleeding, he bandages a little and little, according to the amount of its continuity.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And if he wants to bandage an arm after the first bleeding, and he has a great deal of pain, he should bandage seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And those who wish to heal on the other side, they must heal at the second hour or at the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For there is much blood within the body that is already hot, and causes fever; if they must draw out a great quantity, and widen the vein until it bursts; then one must wait for all the conditions of healing, and place one's hand upon the wound as it heals, so that the patient does not die from the bursting; and this has happened many times when the healer is negligent; and one should not do this unless one sees the arm coming out of the vein, and draw blood the second time, and the vein is closed, that one press firmly upon it; or if it is curved, extend the arm forcefully, for this would be harmful; but let it remain as it heals the second time; or until the frozen sinew from the vein has melted, and place a small amount of salt on it, and press lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if it is swollen, let it be and do not press it, until the abscess is calmed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to draw blood the second time, let it be drawn from that limb itself, or from another vein, or from the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is healthy instead of the main one because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the method of this drawing is that the vein bubbles its hand in hot water, until the blood is red; then tie it gently, so that the vein appears well, then draw blood through the middle, not too narrow or too long; and let the punctures be wide, and draw blood well near the joint of the hand, and if it cannot come out, put the hand in hot water again, and let the blood flow in the hot, until you have enough; and if it is still there, do not put the hand back in hot water, for it puts more in than it was; and this drawing from this vein is safer than all other veins, as there are no arteries or nerves.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The salve of the sainie of the hand of the right side is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is how: strain the hand, and boil in hot water until the blood is drawn out, if one can see it; and if the salve goes against, and if you apply it with everything together, it will not hurt anything; and do not move it too much, for the nerves are all exposed to the bone, and then put the hand in hot water, if it is not frozen in the wound, and it cannot come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the arrow as much as is necessary for you, put oil and silk on the wound to sew quickly, and do this for each rain.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The salve for the hand on the right side is good for the disease of the mouse, and do everything as I have told you to the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The salve for the soap plant is good for all diseases that are not in the body, such as marsh diseases, and retention of flowers, and rain disease, and diseases of the cocks and old legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the quality of its salve is that diseases bloat up in sharp hot water, and rub on the vein until it perishes, and bind above the joint of the bone; and the vein is at the knee, and through the bone many rains go; therefore the salve there or larger rain, or at the knee, is very good.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you have the healthy ones above your belly, and you are surrounded by those who are dislocated, and the healthy one crosses as in copulating; and let the flames be equal.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if he cannot get out of the sickbed, put the belly in the high place, and let the vein well drain.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the healthy one needs to be the first time, then start the second above a little, because the veins are salty; do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and thus make the same sophene of the other belly equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The vein of the elbow is at the wrist, and its healthy one is worth the pain of the back, when it is for an abscess.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the quality of its sweat is such that the hairs between or in the bath, and it is strange above the ankle four times in twisting, because otherwise it does not open the vein; and if it opens, then heal it in all ways that you can, and crosswise; and it is better to cover it, for the legs are clean, and it is very prone to people.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not straighten it, then it heals no pain from those who open or close the door, and towards the small toe, and guards against the nerves; and correct so much blood that you see, and then remove the ligament, and put it on cotton and keep it steady; it is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	of sores by suction
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Suction cups are made of horns, or of brass, or of glass; and suction is done in two ways: either by pricking and drawing blood, or without pricking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this suction without pricking is done in two ways: either all at once, or gradually; and suction done by pricking and drawing blood is done in twelve places on the body, with some being all over the chest; and the others are moved to the neck; and the other two are on the sides of the neck; and the suction below the chin; and the suction on the shoulders; and the suction on the knees; and the suction on the ankles; and the suction on the heels; and the suction does not treat blood, except for small veins that are scattered in the body, and for this reason it does not weaken anyone, as is done with drawing blood; and it should not be administered, neither at all heat nor without heat, in any disease caused by repletion, until the whole body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if necessary for diseases, one must ventilate, or by habit, one should ventilate every hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in each ten; for there are such who, when they have the need to ventilate, have heavy breathing; and some who feel repletion and redness in their face, and in their head, and at their neck, and in their eyes; and some who feel a drop of blood in their mouth, and taste it, and spit it out; and some who sing, and see through blood and tears, and die and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the middle of the month, we command them to fast for three hours after midday.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The sweating of the head helps to cure the headache … that comes from the eyes, and should only be done after the evacuation of all the blood; and this fasting is in place of the sweating of the cephalic, and should only be used by those who are of cold complexion or who have diarrhea, for this does great harm; and for this reason it should not be used by those who are guards or who have other cold diseases.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who often recover, if they become forgetful, and for this reason, it is necessary to place the bandage a little lower due to the uncertainty of forgetfulness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The bandage around the neck is in the place of the neck and the collarbone, and for this reason, it is necessary to tighten it at the narrowest point, and to press against the windpipe, and to all, and to repetition; and it should be placed a little loosely, because if it holds too tightly, it causes forgetfulness or stomach pain and heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The bandage around the two ribs of the collarbone is necessary for headaches, and obtunding, and emigraines, and strangulation, and pain at the roots of the teeth, and it is in the place of the healing of the collarbone; and it is necessary to command the patient to place their hand when applying, that they do not press against the artery, and do not cause bleeding.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	The ventilation of the face is beneficial for mouth diseases, and corruption of the teeth, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the place of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The ventilation of the shoulders is beneficial for diseases that come from heat and filling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The ventilation of the elbows is as beneficial as three veins of the arm, for it draws blood from these large veins; and commands the sick one not to move too much in front, for the inside is bare of flesh, and knows how to draw out nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The suction cup that is placed on the back should be used for emollients from the foundation, and for diseases of the soles, and it should be a large one made of metal, which must be able to pull well; and by chance, if it is too thin, it will break; and it causes great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The leg suction cups open widely, as they attract blood from the whole body, and are useful for ancient pains of the rain, of the marsh, and of the bladder, and remove the fleas; and they are in the place of the two knees, and everywhere they weaken the body after long use, and bring on pain in many positions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The method of applying the cupping glass is that you first apply it empty and quickly suck, then press firmly and move evenly, and do not stop doing this until you see the flesh red and swollen, and reveal the blood vessel; then stop, and replace the cups, and take care of the body's position, for there are some who have tender skin and clear pores: if it is necessary to strike once only, and it is necessary to make large wounds, and a little deep; and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the skin is thick, then it is necessary to strike twice: the first time to thin the path of the thick blood;
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the bone is very sharp, you must strike it three times; and when we want to pull out the arrow slowly and slowly, we should only hit it once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we want to get a lot of blood, we should often strike; and if the bone is sharp, we should strike it in front, and the end should be that the wound is perceived softly, and it is suitable for those who have thick skin and are hard, and who have stones, that you use the points of the oil vapors appetizing and dissolving: if it is in this state, of violet oil, or of sweet almond oil, or of cucumber seed oil; and if it is in winter, of pennyroyal, or of lily, or of camomile, or other similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is large and cold, take oil of tarr, or balm, or aniseed oil, and similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the person to whom one wants to bind a wide and loose bandage, one should not put any oil on it, but it should be washed after ventilation with hot rose water, or hot cold water, or hot marjoram water, or hot cucumber water, or hot porcelain water, or similar things.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have much moisture, if they are raised with vinegar, or hot water of mint, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	Those who have excessive swelling rise from old wine, or vinegar of the sick, or a decoction of anise or chamomile, or other similar things; and they should not be bled before or during the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two; and they should not sleep afterwards, and it is good that they move around when they should be bled and when they are being bled.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And if those who are bled are feverish, and if they are not too weak and inflamed; then it is good that they take cold things, such as large apples and endives and lettuces in milk, and similar things; and they should drink puce juice, and char of Castleton, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	For those who have a cold constitution, take honey syrup, aromatic wine between old and new, and a little juice, and a little pulp and small nuts and pigeons; and the day they will vomit, they should drink more than usual; and it is appropriate to give some myrtle or muscat grapes before or after vomiting, to strengthen the main members; but it should not be given to everyone, only those who are very cold.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The suction cups that are placed on the body are those placed on the liver, and on the spleen, and on the sciatica, and on the stomach and the buttocks and the legs and the hip, for these members do not bear pain on their surface, and only one is done to draw blood from member to member, as we put suction cups on the breast when the baby is born; to remove the viscosity that is in the member, as we place suction cups on the stomach and the buttocks to soften the member; and to relieve pain, when there is an abscess or stone, if by its attractive power it happens to draw out the abscess, or remove the stone from its place; and thus it is done when placed on the liver and on the spleen when there is retained viscosity, and these suction cups are administered empty for their own sake alone; and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes with hot steam, as in diseases of pleurisy, and in such a way that one fills the suction cup with hot steam or hot water where he has cooked harmful herbs.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the suction applied by fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And it should have two large and half-palm-wide openings and a small opening in the middle, like to put a needle, and it should be made of tin, and soft leather before putting it on the limb; and it should have a thin rod of tin or iron in the middle to put a cord, and they should be large and small according to the diseases and age of those who take them; for the suctions of children are different from those of the old, and the thin ones are different from the thick.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And one should thus place this suction cup on the limb: take the candle of wax or the liniment, and put it inside the suction cup through the rod that is inside the suction cup, so that the light is at the bottom of the suction cup so it does not burn the hair; and then place it on the limb, and one should do so as we have said, so that when one wants, if the vapor goes, and remove the suction cup; and take the liniment as before, and repeat often, if you have business.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the suction cup therefore that is used in the disease of pleurisy, at all sharp, does not have a rod or a stopper, and is not administered except when it is full of sharp, and is placed on the limb alone; and this is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	No sutures are used except in members where one cannot apply adhesives due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar parts; and in similar parts, such as ears or nostrils, and others similar; and the quality of using them is that when you remove sutures that are in soft wounds without causing pus, take them; and put them in a soft wound, until they are familiar, and have nothing in their bellies; and then cleanse the wound and the sutures, then rub the member until it is red, and put the sutures on the wound; and when they are smooth and healed, if it is a part where one can apply adhesives, apply them, for this is very good afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If not, lift the limb from below, and then from above, very well, and then wipe it; and if the wound is too large after the running of the pus, soak a cloth in cold linen, and put it on, until the wound is cleansed; and if the wound multiplies, put on shredded gauze, or bandages, and similar things, until it is cleansed; or you put half of pounded flour on the wound, and let it sit until it dries to the limb, it will stop now; and if you have more, take other bandages.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the snakes do not want to take, rub the wound with fresh blood, or you make a needle so that the snake bites it, and then put them on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they die; and when you see that they are dying, powder with a little aloe and crushed silk, or ash, if they will now stop.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	This begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is a restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Listen, dear child, that the foolish man who has never seen any of the old books, nor read any letter; and for this reason the science is unknown in our land, because I found none good; and I know nothing, except by the science of the old books, which I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and by experiment, and by the custom of my life; and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained, and I have abbreviated it at the end, and I have shown clearly the forms of the instruments that are needed, as I have done in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, it is necessary that we say or prologue of this book the sums of the language and the chapters where the wise put their understanding, and dwell on the truth, so that those who are experienced find and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when fracture or dislocation or twist or wound comes to any part, it is necessary that you hasten to clean the wound on both sides, if nothing happens, such as weakening of the body, or children, or elderly; or if the pain is not too great, or too sharp; and use sharp remedies, that is to say, sharp joints, and eye and chicken broth, and do not drink wine, and use no heavy meats, and do not fill oneself too much with food that fills the veins with blood, until you have no doubt of abscess or spreading of matter to the limb; then the pains return to their former government as they had used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	When the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary to apply a thick poultice of meat that makes large norrissement, or has viscosity, such as cooked wheat, and ris, and tests, and pies, and flitches of veal, and oysters, and fish, and large wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For the poultice should be changed frequently and sooner than the breakage.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And be aware that the broken bones of old people and the decrepit do not heal well or heal together according to their nature due to the scarring of the members, nor those who are too tender, such as the bones of small children; but rather, reset the broken bone above the joint, and join the member together, as it was before; and do not leave it for a long time without its work, and for this reason, it is necessary to apply thick meat poultices, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And there are various ways of breaking bones in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	Because the breaking of the shoulder is different from the breaking of the leg or arm, and I will tell you all the ways of breaking in this chapter.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	Because there is a break that goes through the elbow, and another in water, like the tip of a quill for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a break with a wound, and a break all in a small cut.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And each way has its own method, and its proper tool in the restoration, according to what memory comes in its place; and the break of the bone is known by the bone being twisted, and open wide from the deficiency, and it is at the pressure of the hand; and when there is no twisting or it is not at the touch, and the pains are not great, if there is no break; but it can still have twisting, or a cut, or a small break.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	It is not necessary that you move it with your hand, but place the medicines that come after this, and then gently hold it now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And if the broken part that was in a whirlwind, and the two parts are disjointed, you must now put them evenly, as if they were inflamed; and if they are inflamed and come, let it not have any joint, until the inflammation is calmed; then place it evenly to the muscle that you can lightly and safely, and if it is restored, it is lighter than the restorations of this or he has pieces; then hold it, as it should be after this.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if it is in a broken bone at the foot, if it is in two pieces, whether by hand or by string, or by your hand if it is small members, or by two strings, or by one string and by your hand; and place the member according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken member are joined together, you should gently move them according to what you can, and guard that by your work no harmful injury or pain comes; and well join the two bones according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And if it feels good to the touch, if you think it is not quite right: then gently rub it, and do not strain it too much, nor press as those who bring by their work abscess and contraction to the member, as we have often seen.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the member is at a point, properly restrain the pain that it does not move, whether awake or sleeping, turning or in any other way; and ensure that the member is so secure that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when it feels no pain, it is not at a point, and it should be placed in the proper position so that it feels no pain; and ensure that it is placed correctly, as twisting will not come when it is restored; and the quality of the member broken depends on what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	The broken members are different in size, greatness, and shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For there are small members, such as arms and legs and similar ones: if they are thin, cover them with soft linen cloths; and those that are thick, such as the thigh and leg: if they are thick, cover them with a wide and strong cloth, for the wide cloths embrace the whole member evenly, so that there is no gap; then wrap lightly around the affected part, three or four times according to the length of the member, and hold your hand a little on every part of the cloth, then go above the break and hold it less, than the break slowly moves away from the break; then soften the cloth a little and a little, until you feel a large part of the sound flesh, then take another cloth, and return immediately below the broken part; then go to the part away from the break, and hold it evenly, not too hard or too painfully, as we have said in the first lesson above; then put between the cloths linen or cloth strips, until they are all even, then tie everything above with a bandage, and then put your well-made fingers on top, if there is no abscess or inflammation.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is an abscess or boil, place something soothing on the abscess, and what opens the abscess, and leave it in place for some time; then place it on the wounds, and be of a moiety of a wide strip, cleanly cut, or of a stick made into brushes, or of palm fronds, and be according to this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	But the strip that one places on the wound should be slightly larger and wider than the others; and it should also be as long as the limb is small or large; then place the strips as you did in the first line, then tie them tightly, as you did in the first line above the wound; the tighter it is, the less; and it should be a medium thickness, not too thick nor too thin, and be of linen cloth; for if the strips are thick, as I have seen in some works of the threads that make up the cords of linen tapestry, and this is great error, because the bandage cannot be equal if it is too fine, and should only have about a quarter of an inch space between each strip.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the hairs are broken by the sharpness of the stars after the straining in their places, put out of them the stains of linen or other clean cloth, so that it does not become a wound.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the broken bones, and the splints are broken, I will tell you about the treatment afterwards.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And it is not necessary to strain all the broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the limbs are large, it is not necessary to put splints on them until after five or seven days, or more depending on your safety from abscess; and see the manner of ancient plasters to restore fracture, dislocation, and torsion: and you take flour that is held as in the walls of the mill, and mix it with abundant water, and put this mixture, not too clear or too thick, and use it, and it is the common method of the restoring plaster for many positions, and especially to women and small children, because it is not too hard or too rough.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another method of plaster for healing fractures, dislocations, and sprains: take alabaster, ladanum, enulet, and asafetida, each 1 X; myrrh and aloes, each 5 Z; alechil, 8 Z. Grind them into a powder, mix with honey; if the patient's complexion is hot, use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and it quickly heals broken bones, and is worth many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another method of plaster for sprains: take mugwort and valerian, each 1 X; myrrh and aloes, each 8 Z; bolic armenic, 10 Z. Grind them well, mix with vinegar or honey, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another method to treat joints and bones that are dislocated or broken, to relieve pain, and to use the bone for healing, and the fracture: take new linen, moisten it in oil and apply it to the affected area.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	These bandages do not heal immediately, but they are good for relieving pain from abscesses and properly addressing the pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method to heal broken bones: take fig leaves and earthworms, grind them together, and make a bandage.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another method to heal bone fractures and to alleviate the remaining pain from the abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take the root of valerian, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of wheat, of each one a part; and grind, and mix with wine, and if the limbs are chilled, mix with mustard or dry mustard.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another way to plaster, besides the first, when an abscess is about to restore the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take the root of valerian, and linseed, balm, mint, and sage, and flowers of violets and chamomile, of each one a part; and grind, and mix with salt, or sweet mustard, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates said in his book that one should not put on a broken limb to restore it with wax and oil, and nothing else, and he said that it should be between two things, neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems that Galen said that one should put on a broken limb to restore it with dry things that are slightly warm, such as myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to treat an injury and pain: take mallow and horsehair, or feathers of an owl, and smash them, and make a poultice and apply it to the wound.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then release the joint a little later, and be careful if the hairs do not feel any pain, or if the bones of the limb are not misaligned; then do not release it by force again. And if pain comes to the limb, or itching, without rest or swelling, quickly release it, and remove the poultice now; and take a light bandage, and moisten with fresh mercury, and soak in hot water, and lift the limb until the itching stops, and the pain is relieved; then let the member rest for an hour, then put on dry linen, moistened in hot oil or rose oil, and tie with a nut, as long as you are sure of no abscess forming; and relieve the inflammation of the limb, and relieve the pain, then restart the subtle bandage, and a little poultice, and do not strain it too much as before; subtly until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	If you see that the abscess is red and hot and painful and swollen, and you have skill in plastering and bandaging, then reapply them as you did initially.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	And if it does not come to the limb within three days or four or five or seven; and never leave it for twenty days, as long as the fracture is present, and approach the splint from above; then hold it more than initially, and increase its flesh, as I said before; and if you see that the limb is dryer than it should be, then every time you apply the splint, pour hot water on it, and loosen the bandage a little; by this method, then the swelling is reduced in the limb, and it is quickly remedied as the foolish ones do, who restore the limb incorrectly: this is bad, and if this is not done carefully, and only correctly, I see nothing else but weakness and the work must be done properly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various breaking methods
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	There are many breaking methods and various figures, and the causes are distinct; for there are breaks that are made by the percussion of a sword, and the shoulder collapses the entire bone just below the bone, as it does in a hack or a cut; and because of this, this method of breakage is called "hacking".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	Or the sword cuts through the bone from above, piercing it, and this method of breakage is called "absolute"; and it is the wound of these two breaks, large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is impact, or puncture, or from the shoulder of a stone, or to fall on a stone, or similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if it has a break that is persistent, which approaches just at the thread that is dislocated from the bone, or it is above the bone, and this wound is large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if the wound that is set in the bone as subtly as some hair, and it is the fracture small, and because of this fracture is called "capillary"; and if the wound that is made or by striking with an arrow, or by falling, or by similar things, and makes the piece of the bone below enter, and is like the nails when they are driven through the radiators; then the arrow enters inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And there are more who have both wet bones, such as the child's; and they have all these ways of fracture that small pieces are removed like these; and I will speak about it in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all ways of fracture by removal above them, and inquiry with probes, and by the rotten wood that is above.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The appearance of hair is known because when the bone is revealed and rubbed with it, if there is an open fracture.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of fracture, be careful of the bad accident, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, and loss of consciousness, and extension, and palsy, and fever ague, and the eyes issuing forth and reddening, and other similar things in many conditions, it cannot be healed without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see any obvious injury, and you hope for recovery, begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the fractured bone comes first to you, and it is in ice, then you must remove the bone before the fourteenth day at most.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in a state of putrefaction, then you must remove the bone before the seventh day, provided that the flesh around the bone has not rotted, and the injuries we have mentioned occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the fractured bone comes just to the skin that covers the skull, then you must do the following: and it is that you grip the head of the painful wound, and expose it in all ways that you can, and above the shape of the wound as softly as you can, and if blood comes out when exposing the bone, or an abscess forms, help with what is necessary, and it is that you fill the wound with soft cloths soaked in red oil; and let the wound rest until the abscess is calmed, and make sure that the blood does not come out; then begin around the bone to remove, and it is done according to two methods of work: one method is that you cut narrowly in front, and this is the form:
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then another cut larger than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method is that you have several different cuts, some narrow and others wide, and they are sharp and made of iron; and work lightly, so as not to damage the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And if the tooth is very hard and out of position, it is necessary that you pierce around it, as long as you administer cuts with probes, not too far past the jawbone, and should have above the point a margin or circle, which does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone; and you should have several, so that each side of the bone has a probe; and this is the form of the three methods of probing:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The qualities for pricking around the broken bone are that you put a sharp object near the bone, and turn it to your right until you feel that the bone is pierced; then remove the sharp object on another part slightly later, and thus do all around, then chip away the space between the bones of the bone which is between the teeth, and do this more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you take the bone in your hand, or to any of the tools that you have like tongs, pliers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the spine.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have pierced and treated the bone, it is advisable to widen the space between the bones of the bone that remains on all other tools similar to an incisor, but it must be more tense and more subtle than the other incisor; and if nothing of the small bones, or scales, remains, remove them gently with the tools; then treat the wound with tents and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other way of working is as the Galienics say, which is more safe; and it is very good, and that is their word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	First, you must uncover a part of the bone where the fracture is open, so that when you have uncovered that part, you can insert the lens-shaped piece of this incisor, which is the shape:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one part, and the broken piece is in two parts, so that the cutter is against the bone; then strike with a small hammer upwards, so that you lightly cut the bone all around, and be careful of the thread that is outside; if it is against the bone, lightly cut the bone, because one cuts well without harming, and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone break does not pierce through the skin, and the bone is only cut from above, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to smooth that roughness, and remove scales with the fine razor that you should have various quantities of, to manage each limb as conveniently as possible, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you have great razors beforehand, and then more fine ones, and do not stop doing this until it is well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other hair clippers and fracture, it is necessary that you manage according to its advancement; and this is a thing that is not immediately answered by him who has put his study in this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	If the wound is discovered, it is necessary that you take a piece of linen cloth, according to the quantity of the wound, and soak it in rose oil, and place it on the wound; then take another piece of linen doubled in two or three, and soak it in wine and rose oil, and place it on top of the first piece of cloth; and do this more lightly than you can, so as not to irritate the wound, then administer by means of a bandage, and do not strain it except until the wound is healed; leave it in this way for one or two days, until the abscess has been calmed, then remove it, and administer medicines such as lily roots, flour, frankincense powder, aristolochia, and similar things; make a powder from these things and place it on the wound, and administer liquids without bitterness; keep the wound clean, do not leave any ointment on it, nor leave any pus, because when pus gathers on the brain, it causes inflammation and pain; for when something is placed on the wound that is bitter, it does not heal.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take care then, as if no accidents come to the limb, as we have said, it is uncertain without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if no harm comes to it except by the medicine that has been placed on it, which has its own virtue, then you must apply a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil, and one cloth, and put it on the wound; then cure it in the manner of curing that is suitable, until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Be careful that the two bones above the nose are never broken, or one of them alone, because they are two bones; and that one is cartilaginous, and does not break easily, unless it is bent or twisted, and then it heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	If one of the two parts is broken, it is necessary that you break your small finger or nail of the thumb, and put the broken part inside your index finger, and in the palm by default, until the bone regrows according to its natural shape; and do this lightly, and keep that the hairs do not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the broken part is in the upper part of the bone, and cannot reach the finger, it is necessary that you put it on the head of a pin or slightly thick.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the broken part is from both parts, make another and hasten to restore the first joint, if you can; if not, after the seventh or twelfth day, when the swelling of the wound has subsided, then break at the head of the finger with pieces of linen cloth, if the broken part is in one piece.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	When you are applying pressure to one side or the other, where the fracture is, and the bandages are so large that they fill the pores of the nose.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And they say no one should moisten the bandages in the morning and evening.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	I do not think it is right, but they should be moistened with a mixture of egg and powdered chalk; then leave the bandage until the bone is firm and the cartilages hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And never use feathers in place of bandages, and if there is a wound around the sore, and if the fracture is present, and blow the bad air away; now do what you have seen.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	If an abscess comes to the nose while you are working, put a piece of cotton or cotton wool soaked in rose oil or a drop of iodine into it.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If an abscess does not come to the nose, apply a poultice made of mustard flour and incense powder mixed with egg yolk, then place light cotton strips over it and do not tie the nose tightly; if the broken piece of the nose is small and breaks into smaller pieces, remove them with suitable instruments, then clean the wound, and treat other injured parts as appropriate, and apply suitable emplastrums and ointments; and if there is no wound inside the nose, treat it with bandages and put in hot compresses until it is healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	of mandible fracture
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the mandible is fractured, and there is no wound except for it, and the fracture is not completely separated, but is broken into two pieces, because of the teeth inside, if one knows this clearly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the fracture is in the right part, you should press your left index finger into the mouth of the patient; and if the fracture is in the left mandible, press your right index finger, and press the fracture gently inside, and hold it with the other hand by default, and make it even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the mandible is in two, then you must administer traction of two parts, until it is even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if movements of the teeth occur, or breakage, then strain them with a gold, silver, or silk thread, then place the broken jawbone on a piece of cloth, and place a double cloth over it; and place a large, well-made stele or a piece of leather even and wide according to the jaw, and tie it to the mouth so you can, and command the patient to rest, and feed them light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	And if you see that the position changes, then release it to the animal, and then put back what was changed; and place a plaster on top, of flour from the mill with an abundance of egg or wheat flour, after you have removed the broken piece; and place the plaster over the plaster, and if the plaster sticks, and the position of the patient does not change, leave it until it is healed; often healed in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if abscesses come up, as we have often said, apply what we have advised.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, cover no part of the bone that is exposed; rather, carefully cover it with convenient instruments.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, enlarge it according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have exposed all these pieces and there is none left, dress the wound, if it is wide, by applying convenient poultices to it, until it is healed.
de la forcele	of the frog
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The forceps breaks several times in front of the shoulder, and the fracture is according to three ways: either it is broken and disfigured into two, and there are pieces, and it is the lightest to restore; or there is a fracture with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the work when it comes to the fracture with a wound, you should have two assistants, so that one of them holds the forceps broken; and the other extends the neck towards the affected part; then put the fracture in your hands, so that it forms as it should be, and there is no appearance or movement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	If you have to extend further, place the shoulder bone against the pain, using a round cloth ball of cloth or linen, and as large as your need; stretch and relieve the tendon, and hold the ball in your hand, so that you can align the break, as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the tendon of the shoulder outwards, because it comes from above, then it is necessary to prick the painful part over its surface, and place against the middle ear, and push up the shoulder bone until the bone of the shoulder is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then apply pressure to the wound, and if you find broken teeth, it is necessary that you cut above; and carefully remove the pieces, and if the bone cannot be joined for any reason, take one of your sharp instruments; but put the forceps of this instrument aside to guard against the sphincter:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and it seems like a spoon, and is not too sharp, and should be as wide as the bone needs, according to the size of the bone and the skill of the work; and have two prongs, one wide and the other narrow, as the rent in the wound that you made when you removed the bones; and when you are sure there is no abscess, close the wound, and if the rent is small, or you doubt an abscess, apply dressing and bandages according to its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if abscesses come, if you squeeze it, dip a cloth in rose oil and vinegar and wine, and put on it.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The strapping of the bone, when it is in pain and in cut, is that you put on the bone the plaster of the mill powder and some egg, and put on it. Then take a very large bandage of a palm wide, then put the cloth double over the light dressings, and the plaster; then take a subtle staff of three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around that bandage, so that the head of the bandage hangs down; and put the staff on the fracture, and turn the bandage over the collar, and away from the fracture healthy, and away from the fracture bad; and wrap each part, and when you see that the bandage holds the staff evenly, and you see clearly that the staff does not move over the broken bone, if you reward every day, and when the ligaments are healed, if you restrain it; and make the bad lie on his back, and put what you have when he sleeps a small bandage away from the fracture, to raise the dislocation in the top; if it will align the shoulder by the alignment of the space, or you tie the arm to the neck, and not the disliar if bad accidents do not come, up to XX days; then recommend the plaster, if you see that there is a matter, and strain and leave it so, until it is restored; and it is restored in the most in XXVIII days, and less to some men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the shoulder fracture
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	It rarely happens that the shoulder fractures or is dislocated from its place, and it only occurs by touch; if the splint according to the figure of the fracture, and the arm is put back in its natural form, in all ways you can; then put powder from the mill with abundant water on the limb, and light bandages, and put a double cloth on top; then put a wide and delicate board on top, a little wider than the shoulder, and if the board is not touching any part of the shoulder, use a piece of linen to make it even; and then tightly bind the whole with a strong bandage, so that the board does not move from its place, and check the bone every day; and every time it breaks, tighten the bandage, and if the board is broken, replace it, and ease the pain on its side; and the shoulder is healed in 20 or 30 days, and when this number is completed, remove the bandages, and be careful, for it is not bones that are put back firmly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	If a piece of bone is felt to be broken before the joint, and not moved from its place, then cut above it, and the bone, and do what we have said in the breaking of the finger's joint to relieve an abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	of the break of the little finger
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The little finger is never broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; but it often breaks at the base.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, it turns outwards, and causes great pain, and disability, and all, and perhaps blood is vomited, and the jaw opens in the broken bone, and it feels very bad.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that the hairs are pushed back over their heads, and the hand is placed between the shoulder blades, then the shoulder blades are pressed, and the ribs of the two ribcages are brought together in your hands, and subtly placed evenly in all the ways you can, until the shape of the bone is as it should be; then place bandages and soft salves or other light ones on the thin bone, wrap it in a cloth, and tie it to the broken bone so it does not move; then gently round the limb back to its place, gradually tighten it, and rub the book on it every hour, and if it moves, tighten it again; and if it is necessary to loosen it due to corrosion or itching that comes to the skin, or pain or abscess, then hasten, loosen it, and remove the bandage, and apply what has come from methods of healing; then reapply the bandage, and tighten it until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	of rib fractures
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	The fractures of the ribs come only from great blows to the chest and the back, and at the top, and they break only because they are brittle; and the pain is felt well during the examination of this.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the healing is such that you set the fracture as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	Then apply the plaster and the bandage of a splint, if you know how to do it.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the fracture of the ribs is declining inwards, it causes great pain and tingling, as if from pleurisy, because the bones do not touch the lungs; and it should be splinted, and everything and drained a lot of blood, and this is very bad health, and the old ones have put much effort.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And those who say that it is necessary to administer foods that cause the stomach to swell, in order to push the fragment away.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not make this, unless there is no abscess, if it has not come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come, then lance it.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they said that no one puts suction cups on the limb, for they draw out the excess from the limb due to its weakness in position.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they said that no one should cover the limb with linen cloth in warm oil, and then place tents between the ribs to equalize the liquid inside, then treat the cure of pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the pain is great that they cannot bear it due to the bone not being broken, and there is doubt, then you must cut through the rib on the side that is broken, and place a probe to ward off the sinus; and then you must break the bone, and gently pull, and then sew the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and treat them with ointments, until they are healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses come on the face, place soft cloths soaked in rose oil on the affected area; and treat while the wound lies as it should, lying beside the coste where it is supposed to be, until it is healed.
de la brisure dou col	of the broken neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	No time comes when a breaker breaks bones of the neck, and often it does not rain; and so on the backbone.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to anyone, and you know whether it will be healthy or not, if you see his hands softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move or extend them, and when you poke them with a needle, they do not feel.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	It is deadly in many positions, and if it moves and feels well when restrained and not, then the joint of the bone is saved, and the wounds are healed, and it is cured.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	If a similar thing comes to the spine of the back, and you know whether it is healthy or not, if you take warning when the feet are soft, and if the accidents that are in their hands, and on top of the back suddenly vent and egestion without will; and when they lie on their stomach, if there is sudden egestion without will.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when it lies on its back and wants to sit up, it cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	It is fatal: do not labor in its care.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come to it, then it is the lighter thing.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the care for this is that you reward him if he has an abscess that is ready to burst, by placing a red oil or egg yolk on the spine, until it is relieved; then place one of the comforting and drying plasters on it, and tie it with a bandage, and command him to rest; and do not sleep on that part where he feels the pain, until it is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is dry, it is necessary to cover it with a cloth; then remove the bone, then gather the two ends of the wound, if it is large, at one seam, then treat the wound with a poultice until it is healed; and if the patient's shoulder bone is broken, which is called the "shoulder bone fracture," if you have the ability, put your right hand on the other hand to your power, then place the plaster and the bandage on top, if you have the skill; then strain, and if there is a dry bone, do it again, and remove, and treat the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the ribs of the back
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	It rarely happens that the ribs of the back are broken, and if they are, it does not cause much pain to the head; and making it long, and declining towards the side, and coming to the wrong place, it causes great pain, swelling, and inflammation where the bone is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is such that you extend your hand over it, as far as you can reach the broken part; and remove the fragments of the break and its shape; and if the break is only at the top, then set it back into its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long and it leans inwards, lie the patient on their belly until the healing of this fracture is complete.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have set it even, apply the plaster, then place a splint of wood or cloth, and hold the fractured bone so it does not move; and treat the wound on both sides, until the joint is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on their side or their back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if an abscess forms and comes, do not touch it until the abscess is calm, and follow what we have said before; then return to healing, and hold it as it should be, unless there is no bad accident; and this is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the shoulder dislocation
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder joint is between the neck and the top of the shoulder, and if it is broken, one should restore it according to one of the two methods: one method is that you take a single bone grinder, in this form:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie the two broken bones together, and raise them up high, and saw the misaligned part above the seat; then pour some arm bone over the broken part, until it comes to ease, and put a hook of bone in it, then raise it above any heavy thing or the minister extends it down; then put the splint the breaker together with his hands together, until the breaker returns as it should be.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other way is that one should prick the pain above its surface, and hold the hand on its collar, then command two ministers that one ties what is above the broken part to his hands, and the other ties behind everything, and stretches each to its part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is too far, hold the tie behind the broken part, and above the broken part, and stretch each of the ministers to its part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the broken part is close to the top of the shoulder, then it is necessary to place the tie behind the shoulder blade, and the other towards the back, outside the broken part; and similarly if the broken part is towards the back, then it is necessary to place the tie lightly, without labor, until the broken part is even above the shoulder, and above the back, then make it even, as it should be, and stretch it, if there are no complications.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if an abscess comes, do not hold it fast for more than seven days, and put on a poultice of milk and rose oil until the abscess is soothed; then hold it, and the way to hold it is that you place the bandage on the swollen part, then bring the arm up with the assistance of the other, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the chest; and put the dressing on, and hold it with the assistance of the other, and on the arm, so that the arm is in its proper place, unless something prevents it, or if the bone does not move.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use splints, and place a wider and stronger splint on the fracture than the others, and have between each splint two inches of space, and let each splint be so large that it passes the fracture three fingers on each side; then strain against the splints, as I said at the beginning of this chapter on the fracture, more strongly and less distantly.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the position of the splints and the straining, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the abscess is not healed, leave it to lie for seven days, as we have said; then examine the joint every three days, that it does not prick or swell, or that the inflammations do not come to the limb because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the joint, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such accidents occur within three hours or more, the patient should sleep with his back to the pain, and his hands on his stomach; and place a linen cloth evenly over the injury, and check every hour of the day or night that the broken limb does not move, or that the tendons are not softened; if the joint heals by the power of medicine, and give him the food we have previously mentioned, in such a way that the food is very fine; and when he begins to regain strength, it should be thick.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary that the shoulder and leg should be reset in 40 days after all; and then one should remove and administer warm water and medicinal ointments for the limb to heal.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if its structure is crooked and swollen, it may take 2 months or more to reset.
de la brisure du bras	of the break of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "humerus," one of which is small, and is that which supports the elbow; and the other is large, and is that which is outside, towards the little finger; occasionally, the large humerus breaks alone, or the small one, and occasionally both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When small bones are broken, the restoration is light, and the healing; and when large bones are broken, the healing is poor, and more painful than when they are broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is only the small bones that are broken, then it is best to extend them slightly and align them.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it is the large bones, then it is best to strain them more; and extend them over the cushion, and tuck the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and the small fingers lower than the others, and let the fingers cross over themselves, and the cushion in front of him higher than the fingers so that they do not suffer any labor; then extend the ministers to the part outside of his hand, or to the elbow, and other ministers to the other above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then place the mirrors evenly, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if it breaks into pieces, put each in its place, and if there is no suitable bone to hold the tooth, and you cannot restore it to its place, then make a bridge and the bone as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the broken piece there is a wound, I have spoken of it to the chapter; take care of the treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if in the beginning of the restoration there are abscesses, then use the poultice made of red oil and white wax, which is not too soft or too hard; and tie the poultice gently until the abscesses are soothed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	Then remove the plaster, and apply the powder from the mill with abundant oil, then place the splints, and set the broken piece back in place, and a little wider than the others; and there should be six or more splints: whether the broken piece is in one of the bones, or in two; and it should be held above the break, and always less distant, as I said at the beginning of this chapter; and let the cloths that are on the break be soft and moist, and not too hard or sharp; and let the thread, which is used to hold the break together, be made of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	Reward the member and the limb after some time.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	If any accident occurs to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, then you must raise the limb in hot water, until the itching is relieved; and let the limb rest without being restrained.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	Then begin the strapping again, and if the limb is softened and the bones are dislocated, or something similar occurs, then address it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the swelling cannot come to the limb because it is too tight, then you must soften it a little, and let it rest for some time, until the swelling has gone, and then strap it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	If none of these things we have said come to the patient's harm, then let it go for twenty days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	Then apply the hands to his neck, and make his collar even, and keep him still and warm, and let him sleep on his back; and if this painful part is restored in thirty days or thirty-five, or perhaps in twenty days, according to the constitutions and complexions of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the broken hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Then apply at the back of the hand and to us has little breaking parts, and it comes only many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	And when the bone of the hand is broken or splintered, it is necessary that the hairs be cut straight and evenly; then place your hand on the spread cloth, and extend the bones that are broken, and put them evenly in their places until they are well joined; then apply the plaster and bandages, if there are no abscesses, then place a splint according to the size of the limb; and let it be wrapped in a linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the broken bone is in the web of the hand, make a ball of cloth, and command the patient to hold it against their broken hand; then wrap it with a long piece of cloth, and place the splint as large as the hand of the patient, and hold it in place as needed.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is on the under side, it is necessary that you put a splint above, and another below in the palm, so that the hand is open and straight, then bind it all around the hand, and stanch the bleeding between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture comes to any of the fingers, if it is in the palm, place it evenly as it should be; and strain with the hand, and if you see that you should put a straight small splint to lift the fractured part, and do not move; and if the fracture is on other fingers, such as the index or another, place it evenly, and bind with the sound finger that is next; or you bind all of them together holding, which is best, or you put above a splint, as in the palm; and take care in restoration and position of abscess, and support what comes to it, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken rib
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	The ribs of the rib are often broken, and well seen when they return in front and behind; and the restoration is so that one lies above and the other below the broken one.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the hairs are tied above his face, then each minister stretches their string evenly to their part; and this is when the break is in the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the break is close to the root of the rib, then one of the strings should be on the side of the base, and the other strings outside the broken one.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if it is close to the glenoid, and then one of the strings should be on the side of the glenoid, and the other string below; then put the bone in your hands evenly according to its natural shape, and then apply the plaster, and the bandage, if there are no more wounds.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	If there is an abscess that is boiling, let it cool first, then return to your work and treatment; the procedure is done in a similar manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary to wrap the fractured bone in two or three layers of cloth, and let the excess remain, then turn the leg until the toes reach the root of the foot, and tie a long thread between the thigh and the leg, below the knee joint, and bring the end of the thread above; then turn back up the leg and the thigh, and tie the fractured bone with three splints above, and put a splint on the bone of the leg; then fill the space between the leg and the thigh with soft cloth to equalize the tension, then begin to bandage around three or four times above the fracture; and as you go higher than the fracture, and less the tension; then examine the two ends of the thread that you have tied between the leg and the thigh, and the three splints above, then return to the top of the thread, until you reach below the knee joint; and if it does not move from its place, then let it remain, so that there is no abscess or swelling of any other kind.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if there is, remove the dislocation, and return it to its place as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that can be felt, they should be removed if possible; and if not, the limb should be cut and pulled out; and the cure is as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And the ribs are never broken in this way as when the arm or shoulder is dislocated; however, in the restoration done in this way does not cause pain.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And it is said that the ribs are restored in different times, according to the variations of the constitutions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the street of the gentleman
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	It is said that in the street of the gentleman there is little damage, but it rains often.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, it is only a crack or a hole, and it has to all wounds, and without wound, and it feels well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is such that one puts together what is broken to its two, as long as it can be assembled well; then put the plaster, and if you have skill, put a round splint, and hold it as it should be, then reward all the dispositions that we have said in other breaks, such as abscess and similar things; put to each accident what it needs, until it is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the broken leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	It is said that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is called "mustelz" on the right, and the other is called "foscile"; and they break equally as in the arm, and for this reason the restoration is the same as that of the arm equally, and the work is all there. And if both bones are broken at once, then the leg returns to all its parts.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the small bone is broken, it returns in front.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bone is broken, it causes great pain, and one can see it well; and it returns outwards.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Therefore, relieve the extension, and make it even, and tie the wounds equally; but nonetheless, it is necessary to break the fracture if it is ugly, and there are many pieces, that the extension be less and lighter; and bind it according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, take two strips of cloth that bind the leg on one side and the other, and be long enough to cover the leg from the knee down to the ankle; then wrap it around the leg above and below, and tie it in the middle as well, and at this point the leg will not decline to the right or left, and thus it is good; and no one administers the long strip of cloth on the leg, and if it is made properly, and they put the leg to prevent movement, and properly done, they move the leg every day to see if there is an abscess or other accident; if the cure is as soon as it is healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the fracture of the bones of the skull
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle, there is no fracture, but of the bones of the skull, there is never a fracture and it does not break, and there are only a few dislocations in certain positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there is a fracture of the bones of the skull, and you see these bones overlapped on top of each other, if they are protruding from the ground, like they want to walk, then put your foot on the spot where the bones are raised, then press them so much that they return to their place; then apply the plaster and wipe the wound, and put a small pad on the forehead of the patient, then strap the head evenly, then wrap bandages around it and other things that you know how to do.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, if you release the joint, for you will find the bones even, whether they are broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there are any of the two broken, then restore them as we have said for the bones of the hand; then place a splint along the length of the bone, and it should be slightly wider, then put the bandage as I have described, and strain evenly; and if there are two or three, or more, broken, then place a splint according to their quantity, wrapped in a piece of linen, and strain the bandage from outside the bone; and let it be above the head of the bone under the belly of the wound, so that it heals well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you must not forget the other things that I have said about other injuries, as soon as we have mentioned them; and provide care for each accident as it requires.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the finger bone
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bones of the woman are fractured, if the pain is widespread, then lean her back, and tilt her to the side, and hold her from behind; then fill the wound with cotton, and put in as much as possible; then raise the woman, and slowly lift her up, and gradually remove the cotton, until it reaches the entrance of the wound, and the bones return with the cotton; and when she needs to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has done so, replace it, and thus do this for seven days or so: if it is restored, and if you see, take a bladder of goose fat, and tie a cloth around it, and blow all the fat into the wound; then blow into the cloth forming a ball, until the fat is inflated inside: nature will restore the fracture; then fill it with cotton, and leave it in place for some time, until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	When the tooth of the little finger of the hand is broken, or of the woman, if it is reset as we have said in the bone of the shoulder; and these broken teeth are not hidden from him who puts his study and practice into this book, and pays attention to it.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the broken tooth signifies many different positions of the right way of restoration: understand therefore.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the finger, when it is broken, take a goose quill and insert it into the finger; then wrap bandages around it, and leave it for three days or so, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	of fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for someone with a fracture and wound, especially if it is large, such as the bones of the ribs or shoulder or similar, that they be cleaned immediately, so that the cleanings we have mentioned are testified to.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is clean, and if there is no other thing, then restart to restore the fractured part in the same hour, or the next day, if it becomes infected.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if infection comes, then leave the restoration until the next day, as long as the infection is calmed down, and do not touch it on the next day or the fourth, for you will bring about bad accidents.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the jaw is broken and appears to be displaced, then it is necessary to gently place your fingers on it, extending it slightly.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension does not match your hand, then use this iron instrument which is made of iron, which has seven or eight inches long, and its width depends on the size of the wound; and for this reason, it should be three or four times as thick as the thickness of the limb at your work, and it should be round and a little thick, so that it does not press too much against the member at your work, and it should be narrow in front and wide in the middle, like this:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called "palainche", because the patient should have the broken bone placed above the top of the visible bone; and it is bound once, as much as it reunites, and they are evenly aligned one against the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is slight, and the instruments cannot well take the bone, then you must cut off the top of the bone until the instruments have a hold.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot reset the bone as we have said, then use a suitable tool, such as a saw or chisel, to your ability; then scrape off what remains in the bone of sharpness and small scratches.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is returned to its place, and the pain is great afterwards, do not let it stay in its natural position.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	If you do this until it is in its natural position, then moisten the bandage with stiff black wine, and properly if it was already there; and do not put anything else on the wound except oil, where it has oil, so that it does not bring about putrefaction and corruption; then administer these things as you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover the covering all around, according to the size of the wound, and be careful that the wound is not pressed with the fracture; and many times this has been done by fools, and they have caused the pain or death or corrosion of any time; and let the strain be gentler and softer than other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that it is not a bad accident as we have said, and you try to move the limb but it causes pain, then do not put anything on top of it; instead wrap it around, in place of the bandage, with hard cloths, and tie them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days that the wound is closing, remove what you have placed on top of it at all times, and put on a healing ointment, such as tetrafarmaçon and similar.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary to move the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, as long as it is sound and healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the members be aligned in such a way that the bow moves easily.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if they continue for too long, and it cannot be mended but remains bent, because there are small pieces of bone, therefore it is necessary that you remove the wound with a tent, and take out all those unnecessary pieces that cause that pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if the fistula comes to the limb, or in another way of corruption, then it is necessary that you treat it according to what it says in its chapter before.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken and open on the limb, like the bones of the shoulder or the arm, and other similar large members, do not remove it immediately, for many times it kills, but let it remain until it can be healed; perhaps it will fall off after twenty or thirty days, then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, then leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of sudden blows that come to the injury
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We often see after the healing of the broken bone, exactly at the joint, and it is a bad thing to see the misalignment of the limb; and perhaps it cannot do its natural works.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Therefore, if we find it fresh: then administer stiffening medicines, such as aloes, incense, and marrow, and sarcocoll, acacia, and similar things, so that you include none of these things, or all together, and mix them with stiffening wine or with abundant honey or with garlic; and place it on the nose in a plug, and hold it tightly, and do not leave it in the hand for long; then remove it, and start another, until the swelling is gone; or you hold against a piece of lead well made; because the property of the lead is that it removes all the swellings above the limbs; and if the swelling has become hard like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, if the cope above, and make the excess apparent; or you cut it with any razor, until it is removed, and care until it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	a weak limb after surgery
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone is healed and remains after the limbs are weak and subtle, there are many causes for this: one is because it was tied too tightly and not loosened as it should have been; or because there were too many bandages, and could not reach the members to the limb; or because of too much swelling; or because of too great movements, not in its hour; or because it has little blood in its body, so it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the pain less, and make the body tense, until the swelling is not multiplied in it; and give baths, and give joy and ease; then put poultice on the limb, so that the poultice attracts to the great swelling, and the swelling often of high heat, as long as the swelling goes to the limb; and returns to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	a deformed limb after healing
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limbs are twisted after restoration, and the bones are broken open, and the form of the limb is ugly, nevertheless it does not harm its natural appearance: thus one should not believe those who say that one must break the limb entirely in new, and many have done this in our land; and this practice is blamed, and great harms come from it, and perhaps death; however, if the fractures and twists are fresh, then it is necessary to apply heating or softening herbs that have been boiled, such as willow bark, roots, and meadowsweet, and similar things; and the mollifying plaster, such as well-made diluted oil of poppy, and you take the willow bark powder, and mix it with goose grease or poppyseed oil, and apply the plaster on; or you take figs, and grind them with flour of linseed, and similar medicines that soothe the pain.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And it is often necessary to apply continuous and prolonged pressure with dry hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And you should gently move the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the tortuosity is awake and hard, like stone, and it needs to be cut with a knife, if it is necessary to cut into the bone, with a thin and subtle incision; and put ointment and rest in the care.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to none, it must now be brought back against the shoulder blade.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if it is delayed, if the shoulder swells, and perhaps if it is reset to the bone; for it does not matter that one moves it to where it is swollen: many times it causes spasms and other pains; however, when it will be over, if you make the pain go away, then leave the limb, until the abscesses are soothed; then raise the limb with hot and oil, then gently reset it, and treat each limb as it comes back to its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	I have ordered the chapters on shoulder dislocations from head to feet.
des mandibules	of the mandibles
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	It is rare that the mandibles are dislocated, and the dislocation of the jaws occurs in two ways: either they are slightly displaced from their place and softened a little; or they are completely dislocated, hanging downwards, and prevent the saliva from the mouth from being held, nor can he close his mouth, and wraps his tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns to its place in many positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if she is whole and complete, it is necessary that you reset it quickly, and do not delay; and in such a way that the minister sterilizes the head of the dislocation, and places the fingers of one hand at the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts; and the other hand is outside, to hold even; and command the dislocation to soften its jaws, and move them from all sides.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the fingers should be equal until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if it is difficult to reset, especially if both jaws are together, raise the tips of high hot oil, and do not delay in resetting as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	When they are returned evenly, and the jaw with the bad tooth is well closed to soften, put a cloth soaked in a mixture of rose oil and wax on it, then lightly bandage it with moist bindings; let the pains lie on its back, and its jaws be between two cushions, so that it does not move to the left or right, nor strive much to chew, but take light food, until the pains are gone, and the jaw is healed; then change what it wants lightly, and do not strain much to open the mouth for eating and drinking, until the jaw is well healed and healthy.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be reset to their proper position within an hour and are not converted back to their usual alignment, then it may lead to fevers and sweating, and perhaps diarrhea, and perhaps vomiting of pure bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	And when you see this, then it is a sign of danger; and many times the one who has it dies within fourteen days.
de la forcelle	of force
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The forceps cannot be used from the side of the chest without causing damage to the body, and it is not reset once dislocated, and well one can feel it.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is such that the dislocated limb is gently brought back to its place on one's back, and extends its arms; then press the limb firmly with your palm, and it will return; then put on the bandage and the binder, and hold it in place; and the patient who is lying on their side cannot be dislocated; if not, and if it is dislocated once, then reset it to its place as we have said; then put on the bandage and the binder, and hold it in place, and command the patient to rest until it is healed; and thus the same is done with the shoulder when it is healed from its injury.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	of the shoulder is dislocated in three ways: the first is that it is dislocated at the part of the armpit to the outside; and the second is at the part of the elbow; and sometimes at the part above, and this is rare; and it does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, and it does not dislocate inside for the nerves; and many times it is dislocated outwards towards the armpit, especially to those who have little strength, because to these it is done harshly; to those who have enough strength, it is done gently, and it returns gently.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance, some men have pressure or fractures, and the shoulder swells with an abscess, and they think it is dislocated by this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	Therefore, you must first examine him to be sure; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	It is known that the dislocation is when it is down towards the shoulder, and it distinguishes between the sick and healthy shoulder, and you will find a difference between them; and you will find at the top of the shoulder a depression, and outside the shoulder, the top of the shoulder, like if it were a bone; and it cannot move its hand to its neck, or move any movements; and similarly, if it is dislocated in the top, it is not hidden, because you will see it clearly outside; and this way of dislocation is only to be put back, when it is new, or if there are pains.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the manner is that the attendant lifts the badly affected hand upwards, then places the fingers outside the joint, and pulls the joint upwards to the shoulder; and the attendant lifts the hand and extends it upwards, then puts it down; so it will come quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come as we have said before, then it is necessary that the affected hand be soaked in hot water; and the attendant should apply a softening and moistening remedy, such as a decoction of althea and fenugreek and melilot in hot water, and apply it; then the affected hand should be placed on its back, and a piece of cloth equal in thickness, neither too soft nor too hard, should be placed outside the joint, then the palm of the hand should be placed on top of the cloth, and the shoulder should be lifted virtuously, and the attendant should pull the affected hand; and another attendant should wet the head of the affected hand, so that it does not move downwards; this shoulder is now all right, and if you see that the dislocation is corrected according to this method: and it is necessary that you show the person who is larger than the affected hand; and he should be on the side of the chest, and pull the shoulder of the affected hand away from the joint, and lift the joint upwards, so that the affected hand hangs in the air; and another attendant should take the affected hand down towards the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the pain is too light, with it can be anything heavy, and the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And the resetting can also be done in another way: and it is that one puts a long thin stick in the ground, which the patient should also hold like a dart, and it should not be too thick or too rough; then it should be placed outside of the pain, but with cloth underneath, and the pain should be on the long end of the stick; then the hand should be extended from the other side, forming a shape, and the joint will return to its place quickly; and if all these things we have said do not make it return, then do this cure: take a stick of two arms in width and four fingers in length, which has the head rounded for muscles to enter from the outside, like this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then tie it above the shoulder with soft cloth, which was not too tight and caused the pain, then remove it from the side of the pain; and extend one arm over the long one, and tie the helper over the long one, and the arm at the head of the hand, then put the arm over the wide end of a spoon, and let the hands hang down, and let the body hang on the other side: the joint is now healed.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is healed in whatever way it may be, it is necessary to put a cloth of even wool on the side, then apply the plaster with powder from the mill, with incense and some oil, over the entire shoulder and around, then remove it from the side gradually, and return the joint to the plaster, and embrace the hand at its neck, and let the hands remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he change it little, until the limbs are comfortable, for it will heal faster; and then change it again after 5 or 7 days, and move it; and if it is stiff and does not become soft, it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is very strong due to moisture that has come, or for another reason, it is necessary that you administer cautery at three points, as it is placed before or in the chapter on cautery.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all of this, and it dislocates again after 7 days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot be raised above the shoulder, then cut the nerves at the head of the shoulder are torn or stretched or softened; and cut that the joint has never been fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that is towards the back, and the shoulders, or behind, is caused by impact, and extension of hands, and there is another remedy administered; and cure until they are healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing the member becomes stiff and moves slowly, then use the hairs many times in baths until that stiffness is alleviated, and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	That the shoulder joint is dislocated at the points, and repeatedly returns; and it is dislocated from all parts, and specifically in front and behind, and the dislocation is not repaired, for one can see and feel it well; and it is dislocated according to each shape.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the dislocated shoulder with the healthy one, make sure to see it clearly open.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is cut, and cannot swell the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary to reset the joint as soon as the swelling comes, for if the swelling comes, it would be painful to reset; and perhaps it cannot be reset completely at all, especially when it is in the back; it is better than other dislocations, but still causes great pain, and perhaps it kills.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is, when it is so that one can reset it, that you extend your hand to both of their hands; and their arms are spread out, and their hands on either side of the joint, outside and inside, and push the joint together, or at the root of their palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	If the dislocation is in front, then it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and holds the root of the palm which is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if he does not want to return to the place, then administer strong extension; and it is that those who extend the arm, and hold the arm extended by two people, so that it does not move during the extension; then turn the arm from each part, then when you have wrapped a double long and wide cloth; and when the eye sees the joint at the hand, if there is any oil to soften the joint, then bolt the joint together, as much as it returns; and when it is in place, put a dry plaster with some honey on top, and hold it in place, and put the arm on the back of the bad shoulder, and leave it for some time, then release it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	If the joint is firm in its place, then dislocate it and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not hold well, then reapply the bandage and the limb, and leave it thus for some time, until it is firmly placed; then dislocate it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	If it feels gritty after the readjustment of the joint and it moves, then bathe and rub it well, and press until it is soothed; or put a thick piece of fat lamb on the joint, leave it for one day and one night, then remove it and put it in bath water; and when it sweats, rub the joint immediately, then put the fat back on, and then put it in bath water; and do this twice or three times until it is healed; and if you see, then put a piece of moist, warm chaff with butter on it, and strain it; it will return to its original position.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The joint of the hand is dislocated, and the return is lighter than other joints. Therefore, it should be quickly returned to its place at the same moment it is dislocated, provided that the limb is swollen or there is an abscess.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And the return is that you place the misaligned hand on a table, and extend the minister's hand, and the mirror places it evenly so that the palm is placed over the appearance of the joint, and the pressure is applied until it returns. Therefore, it is necessary to check if it is properly in place; then place the hairs on the back of the hand on a table for extension and return.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, place the patient's back of their hand on a table, and the doctor places their hand over the appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it now returns, it is well. If not, apply calming ointments to the abscess and let it rest before starting again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if it cannot be borne, and you cannot place it back in place after some time, the joint will remain twisted; do not force anything into the patient's hand until it is washed, and nothing can be forced into it: then cut the tendon or artery; otherwise, there is no other remedy except to apply cauterization through the skin, and perhaps nothing else works.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	When the hand is dislocated, put the poultice that we have said above on it, then strain and leave it for three days, then remove and leave it like this.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it cannot move well, and there is no swelling, then apply hot water to the affected area, and rub until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the two fingers
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	The two fingers of the hand are not dislocated at any part, not at the back of the palm or the belly; therefore, hold the head of the finger, and push it towards the part where it is disjointed; and leave it for three days, and then put it in place that day; and bind it as we have said, and remove the bandage the next day, and move it, and realign it; and do this often, until it is straight, and do the same if it is dislocated on the belly of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed; and do the same when it is dislocated in other parts.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	back dislocation of the shoulder
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the shoulder joint or neck joint is dislocated, and there are many dislocations, there is no cure, for the patient dies from the pain.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs are that the egestions suddenly jump out of volition, cannot be held, and often soften any member, or the two forearms or the right arm or one; often the shoulder moves at an angle; this is called "gibbousness"; the cure is to reward the gibbousness if it comes from childhood: if there is no cure or healing for the whole.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And those that fall or are caused by impacts or similar things, they said in the old ways of healing with great words, but I have abbreviated them according to my intention and have formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the gilbositeit that comes to the back, there is no engineering or health; and also the one that comes directly to the second rib, and one cannot cure otherwise than that proper one which comes to the back, as I said; and it is that the limbs should be stretched out evenly on his face in the first joint, and he should have some strain away from him, so that he does not become swollen; then make the bandage at the head in a proper way, and the other at the feet, and tie one bond outside the limbs of the injured part, and the other as the hips, and as the knees, and as the ankles; and the assistant should secure the bonds, one at the head and the others at the feet, among the two bandages; and they should be well fastened, the bandage as we have said, and the fingers put his palms on the spine properly, until he recovers.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return by this cure, take a three-legged stool and twist it off the ground, and the pain should be on one side, and beat the head of the stool away from the ground, then put the middle of the stool on the spine; and place the patient's feet on the other end of the stool, and press firmly until it returns to its place; and if you see, do it to the other side.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And it is that you fasten two bands to the head of the painful arm of a long arm, and behind the feet two others, and have between each band, inside and outside, a palm of length; and have in each band one hole, where the turner goes, and the bands are firmly on the ground so that they do not move; and between the two bands have one turning band, along with the turner's bands, and have in two turns two small bands of a length of palm, to turn the turner; and then tie the ligament that is among the tendons to the turner's head, and the other ligament to the feet of the other turner, and each minister turns his turner along the whole ligament, and the masters put the spine even as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when it is even, apply a desiccating plaster with abundant honey, then soak it, then place it on a tablet of three inches length, which supports the neck of the spine and the part of the spine that is healthy, then tie it with a bandage as we have said, and use subtle pressure until it is healed; and if nothing comes at the end of health, then administer medicines that are softening and astringent, with the same tablet that we have mentioned before; and never give one piece of plaster, and never come to appear in the back spine of the back, and beware that this is dislocation; and it is the bone that opens, for which we should not have any presumption: perhaps it would bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	of hip dislocations
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Although the joints of the hip and shoulder do not come out only as dislocations, but also as other joints; and the hip joint is misaligned in four parts: inside and outside, and front and back; and more inside than that, and slightly misaligned in front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of this dislocation inside is such that when the injured leg is joined with the healthy one, it is longer and more open than the healthy one, and cannot bend its knee to the fire; and it is the ones that are swollen on the inside because of an abscess, for the reason that the wound in the groin comes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of one who comes after this is that this accident is opposite to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of one who has this before are that he is well-aligned with his leg according to completion; however, if there is double knee pain, and if it is wanted to make it move forward, it cannot be done before, and retains urine, and swells the ankle, and when he walks, it passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of one who has this behind are that he cannot spread his knee, nor double it, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the shoulder is dislocated at the side of the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The signs of this kind of dislocation are such that if it is old, and it stays according to its position, there is no cure; and it is not necessary that it has presumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in this kind where the dislocation is fresh, and it is of four kinds of dislocation, you must quickly return the joint, and stretch it from inside and outside, and move it to the right and left; perhaps if it returns, and there is no other treatment needed.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this manner, you must prepare one strong minister, and stretch the leg firmly at two joints, or at one that is tied above the knee; and other ministers extend their hand under in such a way that they bite their hands away from their elbows, then strangle him with a rope lying across his back; and some tie the head of the limb; and extend up and down all at once, until the pain is lifted from the ground at once, and remains hanging.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common for four similar cases, and if the dislocation has returned as we have said, then it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If not, then you must care for its similarity. When the dislocation is at the patella, then you should feel the pain above the knee, then place the ligament on the root of the patella, and the leg that is off the angle, then extend the ligament above the angle and towards the calf; then take other ministers to grasp the thick ligament of the misaligned knee, and extend it in the proper form: it will return to its leg now; and this method of dislocation is lighter than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	If you do not manage to hold the two legs of the dislocated shoulder together in this manner that we have described, it is necessary that you tie the two hairs of the painful part together with a strong rope above the two heels, and above the two knees, and let the painful leg be stretched out two fingers more than the other; then hang it suspended by the chief of a stick, and let it hang off the ground two arms' length; then command the minister to grasp the back of the shoulder, and another minister to hold the dislocated part, who should form the back of the shoulder, for the joint is now beginning to return.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocation is in the lower part, grasp the painful part, as we have said in the one with gout, and hold the joint above the painful leg properly, and also above the foot; then put two bands, one at the head and the other at the foot, then tie the band between the thighs on the painful part, to keep it in place; and wrap moist cloths around, so it does not become stiff, then stretch each assistant towards him, and the mirror put equal to his hand, the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, place it on the flat surface, and press it as we have said in gout, and grasp the painful part on the sound side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is present, it is necessary to extend the injured leg firmly, and as I have said; and place the fingers of your pain above the misaligned joint, then press with the other hand, and extend it downwards towards the groin.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is in the back, it is not necessary to extend the injured leg downwards, nor to raise it up, but it should be as it was aligned when it was dislocated from behind, as we have said about the position of the two hips; and it should be on its face, and the limb extended as we have said before, and one should press on the joint at the table; and it will be in place when the leg is extended, and they will be even; then bend the knees, and put the plaster, and the bandage, so that the hip does not move; and let it rest for three or four days, then release it, and put the plaster on again; and if you see that they are even, tighten the bandage, as before, and leave it for three days; then release it, and make the limb move well, until the limb is comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The shoulder is dislocated in three ways: to wit, from within and without, and from behind; and it does not dislocate from the front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the signs are such that you command the patient to bend his leg at the knee, and if he cannot do so at the knee, then it is dislocated; and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit straight, and extend his leg if he can, and put your back against his face, and put his foot on yours; then take his shoulder to your palms, and pull between your fingers, then bend the two sides of the shoulder firmly; and another minister extends his foot, until the shoulder returns to its place, and the sign is that he can lightly bend his leg at the knee; and put the plaster on, and support the leg against the knee, and tie them together very tight for three or four hours, then release it; and do not work on the patient any more until the limb is comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the member is not straight, administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the ankle
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The ankles are never sprained and never fully dislocated, inside and outside.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the bone is dislocated, and it feels painful when touched at the part where it is dislocated: the movements are light, and one should gently extend it to their hands when it is sprained only.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is fully dislocated, one should sit the bone straight, and hold it with the hands, above the ankle; then pull the tendon to your right hand, and then to the left twice, then extend it upwards, and strike the tendon loudly in the upper part; and do this twice, as we have said, pulling and pushing the tendon; if it returns, it is well; if not, if you restart the work, it will return; and if it cannot return like this, then make the bone lie on its back on the ground, and fix the splint firmly in the earth between the thighs, and wrap cloths around, so that it does not move the bone; then hold the hands of the assistant on the thigh, and another assistant extend the tendon to their hands or to the ligament, so that they can hold the tendon while stretching; then stretch each assistant equally, and the splints should be placed between the thighs of the dislocated bone to hold it while stretching; then put the hands equal to the dislocation at your hands, and another assistant hold the leg clean on the outside, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when she does not go away, put the plaster and wipe above, and let the swelling form, and tie the foot to the leg, and hold the nerves that are above the ankle behind, so that the joints are not too stretched; then leave it for two or three days, and if the swelling does not decrease, take away the plaster; then let it go to the next day or the fourth, and defend against the pain for four days; and if it goes before that term, it is not sure that it will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes, it is necessary that you relieve it as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
des dois	For the fire cautery, instruct
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the two are dislocated, if they should be extended well towards work, and this is a light matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in no part of the joint, then it is necessary to make the patient sit with the painful part above the flat or straight table, and put your foot on what opens these joints, then press strongly on your foot until it returns; and when it is even, and there is nothing open, then remove the sole of the foot from the table, place it on a second table at the elbow, then stretch it firmly, and leave it for three hours, then release; and let him rest, until he is healthy.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wounds and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When wounds come with dislocations, and one wants to restore them, often times the pain causes death: if you are not presumptuous in the cure, and you are not knowledgeable in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not merciful and slow, nor hardhearted; at the beginning of things, gently treat abscesses, and leave the pain in God's hands, if you do not see hope of health; and when you see hope, now reset the member to its place, as soon as the abscesses have passed; and when the member is in place, administer remedies for abscesses, and treat the wound, as it should be, with dry dressings; and if with the dislocation there is a fracture, and small bones are crushed, remove them, and do what we have said about simple diseases; and guard against entering the path of fear, according to what I have said, for it is better for you according to your Creator, and for the knowledge of your armor and body.
Amen	For the fire cautery
