O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	Oh, most noble sons, I have completed this book which is the aftermath of the science of medicine, and have filled it with its contents, and have made the end by its explanations and by its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is fortified in our region and is held together by all things, it has perished along with the science and decayed, and nothing remains but the small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this comes the error and the vanity, and the minds are closed and the knowledge is distant.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems to me that I can revive this treatment together with the order of exposure and declaration and abbreviation; and I will bring together the forms of the irons of cautery, and other tools of the work with the addition of declaration and preparation of it, as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because of this reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is prolonged.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for one who undertakes this to master the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until he knows the judgment of the limbs, and their forms and conjunctions and separations of all, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and muscles and the number of joints, and the movement and veins moving and resting, and the origin of their issue.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And because of this, as Hippocrates says that not everyone with the disease is very sick, and with work is little; and similarly in the art of hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you in the introduction of this book that those who are not familiar with the things mentioned before, if they try to perform it, may make mistakes and harm people; so I have often seen many of those who engage in this science and abandon their science and lack of experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a foolish man who lanced an abscess of scrofula or a boil on the neck of a woman, and lanced the arteries of the neck; because so much blood issued out that the woman died between her hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	And another case that treats a stone from a man of age, and the stone was large; it took with him a piece of the bladder, and died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	I had already been called for the extraction, and saw the position of the misalignment and the size of the stone, and if it was cut well, it would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another case that took in care the Duke of our land who had the leg broken, and with the fracture got a wound; and the case plainly due to ignorance kept the fracture above the wound as a splint for a long time, and did not let the wound drain, and thus it ended; and he commanded that it not be removed early; and so it remained that the leg was completely infected and the foot and came to perdition.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and I hurried to come and dislocate his leg; and when I saw it dislocated, it was in place and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But all ways of the corruption were already confirmed or the member, and could not be healed; and the corruption did not cease to spread throughout the member until the member was completely lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another method that would crush the abscess and become infected, and then inflame due to the evil of its lord.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a pustule, when it is free of melancholic humor, does not require that one touch it with iron if it is not in a limb where one can remove everything that is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	Therefore, dear son, it is important for you to know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: firstly, where he has danger in many positions; and I will show in each chapter of this book where he has fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Therefore, it is important for you to keep these things in mind, so that the foolish may not speak evil of you if you take up your arms in a firm and steadfast manner, and use the best means so that by the grace of God you come to salvation and are saved; and leave behind the spreading diseases of grievous sickness; and remove the doubts from your mind, and have faith in yourself so that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galen advises in some of his admonitions: 'Do not take on the care of seriously ill patients unless you are called a foolish miracle worker.'
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have divided this treatment into three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters are about fire cauteries and medicinal cauteries, and the chapters are ordered from the head to the feet; and the forms of instruments, and the irons for cauterizing, and all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapters are about cutting and piercing, and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and the chapters are ordered and the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; it is ordered from the head to the feet, and the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	As we remember from the work, it is necessary that I describe the quality of each assistant and their harmful or helpful nature.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of assistants and their harmful or helpful nature are the longest and most subtle speech and secret knowledge; and for this reason, many wise men spoke about it and agreed on this, but I do not speak much about it because I make it long.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that the fire cauterization helps universally in all conditions where there is matter, because the conditions are: it is to know hot and humid conditions with matter, and dry conditions without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry conditions with matter, they devised nothing and said that cauterization is great help; the others said the opposite: that cauterization is not helpful for diseases that come from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	Because the nature of fire is hot, and should not be cured by heat or dryness; and those who said the opposite claimed that cauterization helps greatly with hot and dry diseases that come from people's bodies.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	When you compare the body of the man and his moisture to the composition of fire, you stir the body flat.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have never found it once by experiment.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And every way, it does not interfere except for those who have experienced it, and who know by long use the chapter on cauteries, and the diversity of human constitutions, and their dispositions and causes of their diseases, and the remedies and the space of time; from other constitutions we do not have fear, specifically in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the hairs gathered together and aligned with the cauterization.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, children, that fire cauterization is a secret of healing and greater good than cauterizing medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For the fire is simple, and it only comes to the member that is cooked, and does not harm other members unless named.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The fiery medicines come from member to another by separating, and bring diseases of great harm into the member; and perhaps the fire finds the evil, for its high heat and for the goodness of its substance does not make it, unless there is excessiveness.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And I have found by experiment and through the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it has been above the truth of things; and for this reason, I excuse the length of speech, because I do not like to give you the secret which is hidden or fire, and the quality of the work, how it cures diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; now receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they should be done at what time the cautery is to be applied, and then they should be prayed for.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that the cautery is beneficial in all times, because the harm that comes from it is removed by the help of the cautery; and indeed if the cautery is for necessary pain, which cannot wait until the time when greater evil comes to the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think like the foolish ones; for the disease that is cured by cauterization has no return; and they say it thus, but it is not so because cauterizations are only medicine that moves the complexion, and dries the humors that cause pain, and is worth more than any other medicine for its swift action, and for the virtue of its work and its authority.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And the possible thing is that the disease comes again according to its nature and the part of the body affected by it and its virtue; and the superfluities are gathered in it from the acquisition of foods and similar things, unless cauterizations are administered where there is little superfluity and moisture, such as cauterization for pain and similar things, and the pain does not return much; but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the last resort of medicine, and it is so; but they do not believe that cauteries are valid after medicine, but their intentions are false, and it is cauteries that are the last resort of medicine because when we administer methods of treatment in any disease and they do not work, then we administer the cautery, and it is worth it.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, it is clear that cauteries are the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of those who misunderstand.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that the cautery of gold is more noble than iron, and they did not say why except for the quality of gold and the highness of its substance; and they said that the smell of the cautery does not cause harm, but it is not so because I have experienced it, and I have found that it is true in some people; and a gold cauteries is more noble than iron, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	When heating a gold instrument, do not touch it when it is hot by the color of the gold, and let it cool a little; and if it cools too much, then put it in the fire; and so it has enough prevention.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	For this reason we use the fire cautery that we have already prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or you have ordered this chapter about the shoulder joint from the foot, because it is lighter to find.
dou cautere olivaire	oil cauter
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cauterization is good for moisture and cold on the head, and it is done for two reasons: because of a disease called "soda", and because of many humors that descend from the joint to the eyes, and to the ears, and due to many dreams and tooth pain, and throat pain, and even for all diseases that come from cold, such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cauterization is that the hairs are removed by solvent medicine, changing the skin III or IV times, according to the virtues and the age and the custom of the patient, which he can suffer; and then repeat the burning of the hair.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then let him sit cross-legged between your hands, and place his hands on your palms; after that, put the root of your palm over the root of his nails between his two fingers; and where your fingers come together, if it bleeds, heat the cauterization which is called «olivare», of which this is the form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place the ink sign on the limb, and by gently pulling and gradually tightening your hand, then release your hand slowly, and reward the limb if you see the bone slightly; and if you do not see it, if you start again with the cauterizing tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; after taking a little silk, and putting in awe and soft cotton inside, and place on the limb, and leave for three hours; after putting on a moilliet in burre; and leave until the burn is healed; then treat the wound of the ointment which is called «tetrafarmaçon», as it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the old ones said that the longer the wound remains open, the more it purges; and for this reason, it helps to heal.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And none of these said that one should cool the cauterization so much that a part of the bone is burned, and then one should remove what is burned from the bone, and it should be healed.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And the others said that one should cool the cauterization so much above, and if one removes as much bone as a spoonful of lard that women put in their flour for the reason that the humors come out wet; and one should leave the wound open for a long time; afterwards, it should be healed and treated.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two methods of cauterization do not seem to me to be entirely good for all purposes, unless in some people where there is a way of fear; and I believe that I should leave them; because the afflicted are weakened by continuous solutions of nature, as we testify in other members; and indeed when the affected part is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterization is safer and milder for me, and of this use I work in consequently in this way.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the ancient pain of the main
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When the main pain comes from chronic conditions that last a long time, one should use the remedies of years and pills called "cochie", and cleansing of head and eyes and plasters; and if one has done the cauterization that we have mentioned before, and it does not help.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take a cloth and apply it to the affected area of the patient, which is of great nature, and that it is not too hot; then cauterize with that fire brand we have mentioned above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est I leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After performing the cauterization on each of the horn's points up to the bone, as we have mentioned before, and perform the cauterization with the tool called «vasselz»; and place it in the part where you put suctions; and raise your hand so that you do not touch the bone: the pain from this cauterization is much greater than from others, and I will speak about it later; and it is necessary that the cauterizations of the horns be more subtle than that with which one cauterizes the midline of the head, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	for the fire cauterization
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	when in one part of the head sudden pain comes, and the disease has spread to the bone, and the patient is purged by diuretic medicines, and the other treatments that I have mentioned in the division of diseases do not help: then I apply cauterization in two ways, namely with medicine or with fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	the cauterization with medicine is such that you press a piece of alum, and remove the skin and put it back on the wound in two or three ways so that you can replace the piece of alum outside the skin; and when it is replaced, hold it tightly and steadily for twelve hours; then remove it and treat further with a bandage, leaving the wound for two or three days; then put on a cotton pad soaked in honey until it becomes hard.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment of ointment until they are healed; and if you see that such fire-burning remedies that I have written or prescribed treat fire-burning remedies.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery is done in this way.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the iron cauterizer of which this is the form:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "clos" because the head is made in the form of a clo or it has a small hook, and in the middle a small appearance; and put it on the painful limb, and hold your hand and gently turn the iron slightly, until half of the flesh is burned; and release your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is before, and flows abundantly with blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After placing gauze over the wound with a bandage, and applying it to the limb for three days; then place moistened cotton on the wound, and treat the wound with ointment until it is healed; and if you wish to cauterize this wound with the cauterizing iron called "cultellare", apply it at the point, and be careful not to cover the artery in this wound which is not ancient.
de emigraine	of the wound
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat the wound as we have previously mentioned in the division of diseases, and it does not improve, and you see that the cauterizing iron before mentioned does not cause much pain or heat, then it is necessary to extinguish the cauterizing iron called "cultellare" until it is white; and apply it to the limb in a line half an inch long, and take your hand once, and do not cover the artery and do not let it come near the bone; and be careful of the mandible that moves when turned, and the nerves should only see the moved part and that spasms do not cause pain, and be careful of the bleeding from the artery when it is cut, or when it is cut, there is great fear and immediately to the one who does not know, and who is not experienced; and leave the work in a short time; but I will tell you how to stop the bleeding when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it is mentioned in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	If you see that this fire cauterization does not suffice for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize it with the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you see, administer the cauterization that we have said or from the chapter of extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has two blades; and this fire cauterization is better than the other and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain of the ears from cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When the ear has pain from cold, and medicines have been applied and other treatments that we have said in the division, and the pain does not move, then heat this cautery called "pointed", of which is the form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait X poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After pricking all around the ear, where the pain is felt on both sides, and moving slightly away from the base of the ear, as you have indicated the punctured spot; and make X punctures around each ear; after that, cure the ear until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture that must be cured by cauterization is only those that move from the gums, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not use cauterization for similar things that come from scars and spit of mucus.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this appearance of torture that moves from a stream of tears and spitting and choking, and it does not help, then it is necessary to cauterize the pain with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and the other a little later the temple, and the third in the jaw joint; and put the cautery in the part that opens healthy, and make the cauterization above a little bit away from the horn of the ear, and another in the temple as long as a pin; and leave the cautery so high that half of the face is burned; and this is the form of the cauterization:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the resemblance of this cauterizing tool that we have placed before, but it is a bit more subtle and requires that the knife be a bit larger; after healing the wound as I have said before, until it is healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres: II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, and it does not improve, and the pain does not have fever, then make four cauterizations: two on each horn of the head, and one in the middle of the head, and one in the part called "vasselz" as we have said before, and the last cautery behind the mouth of the stomach; and treat it as we have said before.
de litargie	of laziness
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease, one should give the patient large and modified brain-shaped pills; after removing the entire head of the disease, and placing the mustard plaster on the occipital region, as written or prescribed for plasters; and this is the method of cauterization: if you do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is thus healthy, well; and if not, make three cauterizations of the emi to the head by descending just below the collar, and let there be space between each cauterization one inch; and the cure as with the others, and if you have seen it swollen, and the diseases are suffering, then make one cauterization in the middle; and if it is a trade, two more above the two horns, and the cure until it is healthy; and let the cauterizations which are called "olivare", as I have already said.
de la froidor dou chief	of the cold of the chief
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the chief be cleaned of years and of the juice that we have previously said; after washing the chief of the painful part, then perform cautery on the chief and under each horn, and behind and three above the spine of the neck; and if you have more trouble, and the skin is moist and the painful parts are suffering, and the disease is outside, then perform four cauteries above the spine of the back; and leave it until the most painful part is healed, and remove your hand; afterwards, cure it as long as it is healthy, and let the cauteries that are called "olivare" be what we have previously said.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use cauterization except for those that are fleaming, and it is first necessary to modify the brain from years and other treatments that we have said in the division when the pain is great and suffering from penetration of medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a child who cannot suffer, make them gargle and chew, modifying the brain often with good meat; then give the child water in the middle of the head, and do the cauterization as we have said before, and the cauterization on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the pain is far and suffering, do cauterizations as I have said to those who have paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauterizations be olive oil according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the pain is sharp, then apply the delicate cauterization as follows:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to melancholy, the excess or corrupted moisture is great, then use the cauterization of parts as we have said to those who have paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to melancholy, the excess or corrupted moisture is declining towards melancholy, and the pain is caused by wetness, then give something to drink that the mind may be cleansed, according to what it is before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After relieving the sharp pain; after making a good tortoise shell-shaped bandage, as a circle, and placing it on the head; if the pain increases, and is held well from all parts; then present the liniment, and use old mustard butter; and heat it gently in a fire, so that the patient can bear it; afterwards empty the circle by pushing it inside the head, and let it cool; and do this to the pain every week once with another good management until they are healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Where you have seen the fire cauterization done by making many pricks all over the cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This method of cauterization moistens the skull, and then puts on cotton moiliet in butter and in the fat of a goose.
de l’awe des eulz	of the eye's
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the eye comes first to the eyes by the signs that I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient the remedy that I have mentioned, keeping the head dry and washing it or bathing it several times a day while fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After that, command the patient to turn his head, and cauterize behind the head, and do two cauterizations on the two temples simultaneously, or one if it is in one; and cover all the cauterization with all the veins and arteries that are outside the skull, and let the cauterization be long according to the width of the temple; and guard against the issuing of blood, and if you see too much blood issuing, then stop it with a piece of cloth.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in cutting the cauterization as you would do it; and never cautery or heat applied outside the two lower bones.
dou cors des larmes	The path of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are ancient and accustomed and are above the veins, or below the arteries that are in the appearance of the main deformed; and one sees that it is superfluous cold flabby, then apply the cautery that I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter: one cautery at the forehead, and two cauteries on the two temples, and two cauteries outside the two bones; and if there is more, then wisely cauterize the sore above the bone with a small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	through the tears by through the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat the patient according to what we have said in the division, and it does not improve, then give him a draught of three poisonous herbs; after that, boil the head, and apply either the middle or the olive oil cauterization; and make two cauterizations with the «clavilis» cautery above the two sorciers, a little outside the cheeks; and guard against covering the artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cauterization called «clavilis»:
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize with this cauterization called «olivare».
de coi ci est li forme:	For this form:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that the second cauteries are made on the two arrowheads as long as they are; and do not leave your hand except until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	the hair that does not touch the oil
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Never have it happen that the hairs of the oil are converted to the pardens, and they prick at the oil, and then one makes cauteries in two ways: that is to say, by fire, or by burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cauteries, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow and are even, then place the hair on the safe side; afterwards, draw a line above the eyes with a figure that is as straight as the line of the mustache, and is like the beginning of the sign among the hairs; then put moistened cotton and musk oil on the edge of the skin, then heat the cauterizing iron:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing a little and a little more times, until the skin is healed in that place; and the signs of the health of the work are that you see the paper retreating, and the hairs standing upright; then lift your hand, and leave it so for three hours, then put moistened cotton on the burn until the blister is opened; after treating the wound until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if the hairs come after that, and the paper is softened, then begin the cauterization on that same spot again, as you did before; and if the hairs are missing, then cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural position, and is even, and do not prick at the hairs while it is growing.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The cauterization with burning medicine is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a piece of parchment in the shape of the leaf of myrtle; then take French soap and live wax, one of each, and grind them together well; and apply it hastily, so that it does not cool, then spread it over the shape you have made like the leaf of myrtle, and put it on the eyes; and if the patient only holds in the eye, then open it as well; and put some soft cotton moistened with water behind the eye; and the one who is sick should be in a healthy position and show his own sign above the medicine, and press the poc and the muff every time the patient feels the burning sensation of the medicine, for it feels like burning.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then take the medicine at your own discretion.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the blistering is passed, lift the limb upwards, and reward if you see the paper raised as it was raised by constraint of fire or by incision; and if so, then it is good.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, then apply the medicine again on the limb or if the medicine has not worked, until your work is equal and your eyes are fixed; then put cotton moistened in burre over it as long as the wounds are chosen, after care, the limb of the boil which is called «dyafenis» and others, until they are healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you are in need of knowing, be well-versed in your work by great care that it does not cut into the medicine with those.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes thin after, and the hairs prick in the oil, then begin the medicine again on the shoulder that is softened with proper paper, as you have done before; afterwards cure it until it is healed; and this is the form of the fuel of the mire:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And since the eyes of men are different in size and smallness, and according to what is your constraints; and do not reply with the wrong way to that which is the study of this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	of the treatment of fistulas by cauterization
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat fistulas as we have described in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not work, then it is necessary for you to cauterize them in this way.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Order the patient to put their head on your shoulder; and clean the wounds around their head between your hands in this way: so that they do not move, nor remove their head; afterwards, put moistened cotton cloth behind their ear or in the juice of persillon over the oil; afterwards heat the cauterizer which is ready: and place it on the head as if it were the form of a pen of feathers, together with the other which is appointed to be the cauterizer; if you see, so that it is appointed from one head to the other, and if you see, so that it is also like a tent; but whatever, this which is placed is good for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula, it has opened, and in its trail is the pus, and the drying; and if it is closed, if it opens, and trace further from the boil; after placing the cautery hot well, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part of the neck near the oil, that your hands do not go mad; and place the cautery in the grease of the oil, and corrupt.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery just to the bone, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, if you restart the cautery again, and if you have experience, and leave it three days; after that, put on gauze moistened in butter, and the cure of the desiccating ointment until it is healed, and if forty days pass and it is not healed, then put on medicine corrosive tonic until the bone is discovered; and the king according to what he would come in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a method of cauterizing a fistula that none of the ancients said.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	To the fistula, and the limb; after putting in the opening a thin piece of iron with this shape:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	And they make of the quantity of a needle's point; and hold your hand or the iron firmly, and do not move the hairs until the points are melted and do not touch the oil; and it is good to put above the oil on the hair a cotton swab soaked in water: the iron melts the hair of the fistula, and the healthy part by wonderful health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the sinus is healed by the cauterization that we have said, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, then you must administer a puncture to the nose, and return the sinus to the nasal cavity according to what is proper for that limb.
des crevaices en levres	of fissures in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times there are fissures in the lips that are called "hair", and simultaneously in the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these fissures as we have said in divisions, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small cauterizing iron according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place the patient in those cracks until he reaches the point of release; after care, the broken bone is set as soon as it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess in the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess appears at the root of the throat or in the eye, or palate, or at the roots of teeth, after it has rotted and fermented and aged and become a fistula; and you cure it as we have said in divisions, but it does not improve: then it is necessary to cauterize according to the size of the fistula; afterwards, plug or puncture the fistula, and keep your hand on the spot where the iron comes from the source of the limb; and do so once or twice, after caring for it as we have said in cures, until it is healed; and if it is cured thus, it is good; and if not, it is necessary to expose the limb and remove the rotten bone, according to what you find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	movements of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat them with medicines but it does not work, then put the hot iron in your healthy hand; after heating the cauterizer in a certain way that you put a cloth on the tooth; and place the cauterizer deeply into the tooth, holding your hand steady so the pain feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; then release your hand and restart the cauterizer according to your will; afterwards fill the pain's mouth with salty water, and let it rest for an hour and then repeat.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in a similar manner, the tooth that was moving is stabilized, and the gum softened, held back, and the moisture corrupted dried.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When pain from the teeth comes from coldness, or there is coldness or wind, and medical remedies do not help, then it is necessary to use cauterization in two ways: cauterization with butter and cauterization with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cauterization with butter is such that you take butter from a fresh cow, and the end in an iron or copper spoon; afterwards take cotton and wrap it around the point of a tent, and moisten it in hot butter, and put it on the painful tooth firmly and hold it until it is cooled; and thus do often until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see that moistened wool and cotton in hot butter is not enough, and put it on the aching tooth, and put it on the heated iron as far as the heat of the iron reaches the movement of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	The cauteries are such that you can hold a hot iron or brass, and it should be large enough that the heat does not reach the mouth of the wound; after heating the cautery, because of which the form will come out afterwards, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled; do this often, because the pain will be as great that same day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is necessary that the wound fills its mouth with good butter in the urgency of this cautery, and then the raw meat; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make a fire cautery on the head that you wish, and according to what you have at hand; and this is the form of the knife:
des scrophules	of the scaphoid:
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scaphoid bones are wet and cold, and are not obedient to digestion by medicines, then heat the fire cauterizer of this form, and have two openings for the fumes to escape on the other side; and put the cauterizer hot on the abscess once, or as often as it vies with the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, put the cauterizer according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it thus for three days; and put wool moistened in butter on the burn until the wound is healed; afterwards care for the wound with ointments and bandages until it is healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the skull:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When moisture overflows through the channels of the bone, and especially when it comes from a cold constitution, then you must first evacuate the hairs by medicines that dissolve; after that, apply cauterization to the root of the neck, and be careful not to bring it too close to the neck, and do not burn too much but just a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that, apply another cauterization to the joint of the neck to the base of the spine, and let the cauterizing iron which is called "clavile" be used because of its shape; and treat the limb as we have described before until it is healed.
de la toust	of the tooth
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and disease of the tooth are from cold moisture, and the pain has no fever or sweat, and this is an ancient disease, then make two cautery marks on the forceps in its sight; and the other cauterization comes between the breasts; and let the cauteries which are called «clavile» according to the form that is written before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see, make cauterization by holding the whole cauterization which is called «poins» because of the form that is written before in the disease of the ears; and let the points be just to 30, or around.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After treatment, the patient according to what has been said before, and let the burns heal in three stages according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And because the burns are lighter, because you make three times as much.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Afterwards, let the hairs grow over the back and over the shoulder; afterwards, relieve the pain in the area of the titillation with your right hand; and if the joint is dislocated inside, then heat the burns that have two needles as follows:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and cauterize the wound until it pierces just at the costal, and bring the four burning irons together; and because of this, the cauterization is made with the cauterizing iron that has three prongs, because the shape of the cauterization is these four prongs; and they are the nerves according to the subtlety of a tent, and it is the form of the cauterizing iron that has three prongs.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And never are they placed on this one nerve because it has eight burning irons.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After place the cauterizing iron perpendicularly, break with silk; after rest the wound, and do not move the limbs by long tension until it is well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above, this thing happens rarely, then make fire above the thick edge of the cauterizer, or many of the cauterizers in pinching.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and it is bound with moisture and is free from pain.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When cold and much moisture come into the stomach until it is at its condition, and they multiply the diarrhea in him, and are usual methods of cures and he does not improve, then it is necessary that the pain be soothed above his back, and he extends his legs and his hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	After this, apply three cauteries to the tongs, one after the other, with the quantity of a drop, at all times to the claw-like cautery, and two cauteries afterwards on the two ribs until the figure of the cauteries is at three angles, and have equal space between them so that they do not join together as they go through the perforation; and let the cauteries be so sharp that they press into both parts of the bone, and let the figure of the cauteries be in this form without twisting:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you see that the cauteries are being applied with a large cautery in the stomach in this form, and the one who has fear of this cautery, cauterize by pricking and holding above the stomach, and do not follow the quantity that you have seen of the needle; then cauterize with the entire cautery that is called «point».
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the care of the cure that we have had before, as long as they are healthy.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver comes with pain from heat and moisture and great swelling, as long as it is not removed from its natural condition by excess; and the pains are relieved as we have said in divisions, and it does not help him much, then the pains should be placed above its habitual place; and a sign of three cauteries according to this form and figure and quantity over the liver, below the hypochondres, where the ears of the ox come; and there should be space between each cauterization the width of one finger; and the cauteries should be long and not press much with the hand at all the cauterization; and it should be turned only as much as the half of the body, and the pains should be placed above its feet; and if it cannot, then it should be lying down, and extend its legs, and raise its arms; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if you wish to cauterize these cautery tools with fire, if you are skilled and wise in the art, and beware that you do not burn everything all at once, for you would make the whole body stiffer; and that it does not boil, for the flesh is very delicate there, and the skilled ones to see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When he has an abscess in the liver, and you know whether it is in the liver itself or in the gallbladder: if it is in the liver, it causes pain that is not too strong; and if it is in the gallbladder, it causes pain that is severe.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And when this treatment is finished, it is necessary that the hairs be singed over the patient's head; then the doctor should apply a poultice where the abscess is, and then heat the cauterizing iron which is similar to a brand, because of which this is the form:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize with the cauterizing iron until the pus is removed, and it comes just to the surface, until the wound is completely healed; after the treatment according to the treatment of wounds until they are healthy; and it should only be used by this cauterizing iron by those who have studied long in the art of medicine, and by whose hands these diseases have never been corrupted.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Therefore, it can be boldly overcome, and in all ways, it seems to me that it is worth leaving it alone.
dou cautere de pleuresin	The fire cautery of the chest
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that one should use the root of aristolochia for chest cauterization in this manner: take a long root of aristolochia, the longest you can find, and make sure it is dry, and also as thick and long as your finger; moisten it with oil, and hold it over the fire, and cauterize the wound between the armpit and the neck, and two smaller cauterizations slightly downwards on the part that is below the beard; and two cauterizations on the fifth rib and the sixth, declining a little behind; and one cauterization in front of the belly, and one between the shoulder blades, and two on the back, and two in front of the shoulders; and do not press your hand, but hold it open as if smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And it was said by no ancient that any man used such fire cauterization similar to the razor, and they poured water on it and put it between the ribs, until it came to the abscess; and it was so painful, as we have said in the liver abscess.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work, there is fear or the pain kills now, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have said in the divisions of treatments, and it does not improve, then they resort to three methods of cauterization that are good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	When there is a certain way that you make three or four cauterizations, lining up according to the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the fire in the liver that we have mentioned before; and do not press your hand on the whole cautery, and let the hairs be on its back; and another way of cauterization is that you heat the cauterizer that has two needles, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the curved part that is near the mouse, or the ear of the hair where the pain comes from the right side, and let the elevations that you lift the curved part according to its curve, according to the length of the body, and the cauterizer should be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After two hours of applying the first two blisters, let the patient perceive heat from the other side, and then remove the cautery, and thus enter into four. And if you see, then cauterize the entire cautery at three fingers.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After treatment when the patient has gotten pus by long tension, and it is worthwhile to do the other treatments mentioned before.
de ydropisie	of hydrops
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cauterization is not useful for hydrops, except in the manner called "ascites".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you treat it according to the methods that we have mentioned in divisions, and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary that you make four cautery around the belly, and one above the stomach, and one above the liver, and one above the spleen, and two behind the back above the spine, and one at the worst place; and let the cautery be close to the surface of the skin.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After the fire cautery has been applied for prolonged periods, do not neglect the care of the wound after the cauterization; and healing will hasten, and both intentions will be achieved with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the fire cautery for the abdomen is as shown above; and for the back, it is olive-shaped, according to what is written below.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the inflammation of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the feet are inflamed and plain with yellow blisters, it is necessary to cauterize above the back of the foot between the auricular and annular; and lift your hand with the cauterizer towards returning.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deeply, thus avoiding the yellowish part, and let the cauteries be done according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After making two incisions on each leg at the tip of a sharp knife; and let the cauteries be long, one behind the knee in front and the other in front of the knee, inside the leg; and leave the cauteries longer than necessary to cure, so that the wound may heal. After curing the other cures that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	of the menstruation
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	When abdominal pain comes from cold and moisture, as long as the retentive and digestive virtues that are in the stomach and intestines are obstructed, and cannot be cured by other means of treatment; and you see the patient suffering greatly and with great virtue, then make a large cauterization on the stomach according to what he has spoken before about the stomach cauterization, and circulate the cauterization; and four cauterizations around the subtle belly, and two cauterizations above the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moisture abundant and the pain suffering, then perform the fire cautery above the knuckle, and I cautery above each rib, and two small cauteries below the stomach, for the cure is profitable when it has good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the treatment of worms
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When the worms are in the foundation, or one or more, and are ancient and are large humors cold and moist corrupted, and are treated as we have said in divisions, and it does not improve, then perform cauteries: three above the spine of the back, which is all before unmedicated little by little in triangular, and one cautery outside the belly two doses; and if you think the stomach is cooled, and the food does not cook, and one sees the face swells, then the face has one large cauteries above the stomach, as it is previously said, and one cauteries above the liver, and one cauteries above the spleen, and all the cauteries clavile; and leave the cauteries open long tension.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment, the limb as long as it is healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the cartilage that is called "thelul
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you cut the cartilage called "thelul", heat the caustic that resembles a razor, and then place it all burned on top of the cut cartilage; and leave your hand there until the cauterizing reaches the base of the vein, from which it bleeds; do this once or twice, and if there is much cartilage, cauterize each one as we have said; after curing wounds as long as they are healthy; and if you cauterize with a large caustic above the cartilage, it will have greater help.
de plaie mal curee	of a badly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the wound cannot be treated by a surgeon or opened, as we will tell you in its place, then comes a disease that cannot be healed except by cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When any comes fistula, and it is alerted and given purgatives and corrupted moisture, then you must provide for the whole of a thin tent, and guard that you cleanse the tent as much as it has of preparation.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After heating the cauterizer which seems like a razor, and the bouching in the fistula according to the quantity that the tent has entered, and then begin the cauterization again until those coursing and corrupted are destroyed, once, or two, or three, according to the quantity of the need; and guard against burning the nerves which are within, and the great veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	If the fistula goes to the center of the bladder and the intestine, you should not make any incisions except in the place where it is needed, and do not think that it is not cured; after healing the wound as long as it is healthy, and if the wounds are sealed, and the matter is removed along with the tension, then wash the wound completely clean; and if the matter is not removed, seal the wound and corrupt the bone at the source; and thus as one of these that we will say in its place.
de la maladie des reins	of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain in the loins comes with great swelling, and does not take the form of a woman, then it is necessary to cauterize the kidneys on both sides with the clavile caustic that we have already mentioned; and if we cauterize them in the middle, there will be three cauterizations in a line, and they will be more helpful.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is small and weak from dryness and moisture, if the hairs retain urine, then perform a cautery in the part in front of the bladder, where the hair begins to grow, both on the right and left, and let each cauterization be as long as a needle; and perform a cautery in front of the back, or two if you have need; and let the cauterizations be like a clavicle according to the form previously mentioned.
de la marris	of the marsh
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the marsh is cold and moist, and does not allow a woman to conceive, and the flowers are corrupted and their term late; and when they come, they feel great pain: therefore it is necessary to perform three cauterizations around the womb, as we have said for cautery of the bladder, and two cauterizations in front of the back; and let the cauterizations be like a clavicle as we have said.
de la hainche	of the waist
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moisture of the waist descends to the iliac crest, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the muscles of the buttocks are found to be separated, then it is necessary to cauterize the pain above the iliac crest with a cauterizer similar to a circle, and sign before the bone around the iliac crest as it returns, so that the iliac crest is within the circle; and if it is such a cauterizer as those that have been cauterized for the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cautery is not present, perform three large cautery of the groin as it is done for all the couriers; and the care until they are healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain in the loins
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the loins of the backbone, and it is from cold and moisture, and the pains are cured by what we have said in the division and the care does not help, and the disease is ancient: therefore it is necessary to purge the pains of large humors with fetid pills, or other good-quality pills similar.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After the cauterization; and the manner of the cauterization is as follows: it is to say together with fiery medicines, and fire cauterization.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cauterization is performed in various ways, such as: you cauterize above the hip bone three triangular cauterizations in this form, and make good depth and great, and let there be between each cauterization a space of one finger's breadth, and let the cauterizations be made with oil; never make a cauterization in the middle above the hip bone, because it has four in this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see, if the cauterization is made with the circle that we have already mentioned in the dislocation of the hip; but make it in a different way so that the circles contain the whole hip, and all the bones are arranged properly.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the way it is done in sciatica, when the pain remains in the hip, and does not reach the thigh or leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it comes to the thigh and leg, then two cauteries are made where the hairs lie, and the pain is said to be there, and one cautery of four needles is applied above the ankle on the right side; and both cauteries should be with a sharp knife, and the thickness of the skin should be considered; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two or three fingers or near the ankle, then the cautery is applied where he feels the pain three or four times at the cautery called «poins».
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if it is a job, do more; and if the pain is displaced from the groin to the thigh, then cauterize with a surgical or circular cautery, and be careful in all your cauterizations that you do not leave the cautery too long, burning nerves and large arteries, and do not cause greater harm and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who have cauterized above the ankle of the foot, and left it too long that the leg was completely bent, and the foot also, and all the bones were perforated and corrupted.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a stomach purge resulting in death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in both parts together, apply cauterization to one and the other, in this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And those who know in the cauterization of the loins, this is how it is done, take such a hot iron and as big as a navillon of a finger, or a little less, and strike between the ribs and from one side to the other at the distance of about an inch; and let the strikes be over two parts, and also like a needle, and there is the right shape of the iron.
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let the wound be heated until it is completely red and feels hot, then place it on a piece of cloth from the back of the painful area, and turn it over to the healthy side; and cauterize once with the cautery and leave for three days; and then apply a poultain of butter, and keep the wound open long; after the dressing of ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasis says that we use little of this cautery because of the fear of its appearance, and few see who use it; and therefore it is good cauteries, which can bear it, and where it takes effect.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The instruments of the fiery cauteries are such that you make a tool with interlocking pieces on one side of the door edge, and it is either of brass or iron at a length, and at the top has two, and each quantity of the size of a needle; and they are open above and below, and join together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After placing the belt of the back hanging on the side that is sane, and quickly place your hand over the belt of the back; after pouring between the two circles of the hot water that has been heated at the fire I pound, and let it stand for an hour, and suffer the hairs the heat and the burning of the.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Because it is true that there is biting as with fire; and when the bitings have passed, lift your hand with the instrument and raise the waist gently, and leave it thus for three hours, and put butter on it until the black scab from the burn has been removed; and let it rest for three hours so that the purgation may be complete; and this would be the last aid after the cure of wounds as long as it is healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has spread to the thigh or leg, use the instrument that stains the cloth according to what you have done in the waist increased; and this is the way of hot water, and I have written it or treated in the correction of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take quicklime and live chalk, as much of one as the other, and crush them together, and put them in a new earthenware pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	And if it has small pores where the point of a razor cannot enter; and put that pot in another well-pounded pot, and put on top of that alkali and chalk and pour boiling water over it, as long as there is one above the powders, you will have it well prepared in your hand; and leave it so long as it drips with water and chiece or pot can be pounded, then take all that water, and pour it over chalk and alkali as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And if it is very painful and administered in the form of medicinal work and cauterization of other members, for it does great harm like fire, and if other medicines are cauterized well on the back, such as mustard plasters and chalk with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	Galen tells us of a cure where some people were cured of the pain in the back and sciatica, and the louse was much, and he said that no other cure was made, and that they were cured once when this cure was made, and he bathed as it teaches afterwards.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And in a similar manner, you should apply a fresh, green, and dry litargire, and grind it thoroughly with some grease, and place it on the back and thighs and legs where the pain is, and bind it; and leave it for three hours until the hairs no longer feel the burning.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	Then make him enter a warm bath until the heart is slightly warmed, and then make him enter a bed, and the pain will disappear entirely and he will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And advise that no one should use such cauteries or medicines unless after the evacuation of blood.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides says that when the vein of the temple is cauterized with the heat of goat's fat, it helps much; and the cautery should be made in this manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take another and beat the old oil, and put it on the fossa that is between the thumb and the other one called foscile.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	Then take some dry goat fat, and heat it in the fire until it becomes charcoal, and put it on the cloth, and leave it until it is soaked; and do this again, and do not stop doing this until you think that it has reached the waist, and that the pain has stopped; and this manner of cauterizing is called "goat's fat cauterization".
de la dolor dou dos	of the great pain of two
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or from impact or from too great evacuation, or from similar matter spread coldly, none of these situations is worth cauterizing, because it is better for those who have recently been infused with cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary to apply foul-smelling pills or similar things after the pain, three lines wide and one line thick, with five or more cauteries depending on the strength and quantity that the pain can bear; and let the cauteries be made according to the cautery called "poins"; and if you see, make three or four at the average cauterizer in this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This disease often comes to small children, and the signs of onset are that they have a stiff neck when walking, and fear; and you feel it in the last spinous process at the back and in us the appearance that comes above the other spinous processes.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see it and you see it healed, if you cauterize it with this fire cautery in this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	If the fire cautery grasps every part of the spinous process.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, if you cauterize around the spinous process with this fire cautery holding II lines or III, and they are close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After healing the limb as we have said, according to how it is healthy, and be careful not to apply the cauterization in a place that is swollen with nerves.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When the pain of the joints is from moisture that is swollen in each member of the body, and when the pain comes suddenly, which is properly called "gout", and when it is a cold cause and cures of medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauterization in this way: apply a lot of cauterization around the joint, and let the cauterizing oil be applied in this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is a reason to hold the face down with the sharp instrument, then apply the entire cauterization process that is called "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come from the jaw and other joints, and this often happens, then apply cauterization on each joint with three or four cauteries of each part, throughout the entire cauterization; and if you have more skill, do so, but do not exceed the amount that the patient can bear.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the jaw and back, then administer the cauterization that we have mentioned in this chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are severe, make points two lines deep; and if they do not subside, make points above each joint and above the hair of the hand; and if the pains come from the fingers or shoulders, cauterize each part, and provide good care and medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you provide good care and purge the humor, it will be healed with the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	of the toothache
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When toothache comes suddenly, and the bile descends to the intestines and this is unusual, it is necessary that when you see it coming to treat, that it does not move much that day; and that you use things that soothe the stomach, so that the pain goes down from its belly; then make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to tilt his neck until the toothache is relieved, and rub it at your fingers, and sign above the tooth socket with a sign like half a circle above the chest; then heat the cautery of which this is the form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	so long as it is white and sheds senselessness.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then remove the dirt from its joint; and the ministers stain their hands above so they do not return behind; and work well the thighs at the dislocation, and put some oil on him on the calves and on the knees, and the other on the lowest that stains the hands; then put the cautery on all your hand, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, start again another until you come just before the bone; and be careful that the dirt does not come out while you are doing the cautery; that you do not burn it; and that by this the pains do not kill, or other evils.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And if you do not come to the bone with the fire cautery, your work is worthless.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And the cauterizer for children should be thin according to their size, and for large people also thick according to their size; after three days care for the bone of the fire cautery until the burn is healed; then care for other wounds as long as it is healthy, and let the hairs grow for forty days on its back until the wound is well closed; and it is necessary that its scabs be removed thoroughly, so that the pus does not come out when it tries to go into rooms.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	After forty days, when he wishes to rise, he should be given a well-made bandage, and it should be applied for another forty days; and he should have good rest, that he may work little and avoid too much drinking and eating, and too much boasting; and if he follows this instruction, he will be completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say after the treatment of cutting into his chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the tearing of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When tears come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow any more, then apply the fire cautery according to its quantity, and let the third part of the cure be applied; after the cure as we have said; and none of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized with the cautery at three angles in this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but the first sign is to bend and make a line across the width of the rip, and another one after, and keep your hand on all the cauterizing iron.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauteries are lighter and quieter.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of ancient pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes to any limb, whether to fall or to pierce, and this pain lasts long, and the medical cure is not effective, then it must be cauterized with the cauterizing iron called "poins", and the cauteries should follow the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and strength and location of twists and pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If it is safe to use the first cautery, it is good; if not, start another cautery on top of that one, for it is usually customary that it should die to the member that is closest, for which reason you must make the cauteries until the wounds are healed.
de meselerie	of mutilation
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	Mutilations are never treated with cauterization by great help, and even the disease that comes from the putrefaction of pus and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	If you see that it is being cauterized, take care if the disease is at the beginning, and if it has been cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not remain or disappear, and you doubt that the corruption will not spread throughout the wound, then make three cauterizations: I on the forehead, and the other towards the front at the end of the eyebrows; and II on the two temples, and I behind the ear; and leave your hand so that the cauterization reaches the bone, and as long as the scabs come out so far that the vapors of the large humors can escape; and cauterize again on the mouth according to what is in front.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules; et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	And if the injury is widely spread; and it is clearly evident, then you should cauterize with these cautery methods that we have mentioned or chief, and the cautery in the nose, and two above the spine of the neck, and six above the spine of the back, and one great above the rump and another behind, and two above the shoulders, and two above the elbows, and two above the knees, and one above each joint of the hands and feet, and above the wounds of the hands; and be careful of the nerves that are above the back bone, that you do not burn them; and never make a cautery over the bone of the little finger, and one over the bone of the stomach, and one over the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And the more you do cauterization, the less you should help, and move them; and the hairs do not feel pain as much as a healthy person does, because the body is already corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	It is necessary that the cauterization be large and small according to the members and the joints, according to what you will find in the ways of irons.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After curing the wound with flour and honey and other cures until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When inflammation comes to any member and is treated with medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not healed, then cauterize the member according to its size and smallness; and let the cauterization be a little inside the skin; then treat the wound until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And never cauterize at the hand, back, and shoulder, at the end of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus it is ossified by the inflammation; and in any way do not interfere unless you know the members and their issues of moving the body.
de albaras	do not comment on whether the translation is accurate or
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" is awakened, and medical knowledge does not help, then cauterize it with a cautery a little in front, according to the quantity of the cure, until the swelling is ossified and its color changed; then treat it with flour and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and one part of colon and one part of almond, each of a different kind; and mix them all together, and apply it to the affected area, and bandage it with a cloth, and keep it on the body until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	the treatment of chancre by cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When chancre appears at the beginning, and you see it stop spreading, then cauterize it with a cauterizing iron that seems like a circle, all around the edge of the chancre.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And many people say that one should also cauterize in the middle of the chancre; and I do not think this is good, because I believe it should not be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never seen it happen once; and a better thing is that it be cauterized all around, with the cauterizing iron that is called «circle», as we have said in many cauterizations.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When anyone has a disease called "adubelati", and it lingers to die or due to the excess that it causes or due to the age of the disease when they are elderly (that is, too old) and they have little blood, or due to great tension; and you see it hastening to die: then cauterize around with many small cauteries in pricking; afterwards leave it thus.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it pierce through the entire cauterization, then heat the cauterization from where this is the form:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the middle of this disease called "adubelati" until the cauteries have perforated the skin, and be such that the cauteries feel it beforehand in a similar manner as the course of the pus is alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment until they are completely healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	The treatment of fire by iron.
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another way of disease is called "corrodens", and is nothing but a moisture in the member, as it corrupts the members like dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in the limb that can suffer cauteries together with fire, then heat the cauteries with a very small and large knife, according to what is needed for the limb or the disease; afterwards cauterize all parts until you reach all the corruption, and nothing remains of it, so that everything that is corrupted is removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	Then leave it three days, and apply the cauterized lead above the wounds, suffering great pain with oil until all the charred flesh is removed and all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment of wounds, they generate pus.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if you see after three days that healthy char does not arise, it is good; and if not, then the cauterization begins again on the remaining corrupted parts.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this method has never been treated with medical science in place of fire cauterization; but all the same, fire cauterization is of greater help, and I have already mentioned the cure of medical science in the division: take it when you have the opportunity.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of the joints which come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times it happens that at the feet by deficiency, a disease arises which is called "clubfoot" according to our understanding, and it is a great disfigurement which makes the foot look ugly.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauteries of this disease are in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	That is to say, fire cautery, and ice-hot cauterization.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Fire cautery is that you heat the cauterizer as if it were a pen of bovine, and it is made of good iron at the measure that it can penetrate the nail on all parts, and that it has thin edges; afterwards, place it all hot above the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until it comes to the end of the nail; and leave it thus for three days until it begins to rot; then make an ointment of wild herbs beaten with silk, and leave the ointment on all night, and the nail will fall off and will be rooted out from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure the limb of inflammation by applying warmth until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are converted by defilement of the body, and often in the hands and feet, it is necessary that you apply cauterization with very hot iron; and it is in this way: take a needle of brass or iron, or a quill of vulture, and put it on the nail and the nail bed, that is to say, the warts; and put the needle over so that it can cover all around, then put a little hot water, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand in turning so that the edge of the needle comes to the root of the nail, and find the very hot water way deep up to the root; and suffer the pain of the hot water for one hour; then let it be like this, and it will fall off all at its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Then do another one, until you have checked all those that are in the body, then cure the wounds that cause harm to the heart.
li cure dou trembler	cure the patient of trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee; et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When anyone trembles from cold or from a quarter fever or other, it is necessary to apply four cauteries or four on the back; one cautery between each spine; and one cautery at the navel; and one above the stomach at the olive cautery; if it leaves him trembling, and hastens the recovery from the illness of cold.
des pustules puans	of pus-filled blisters
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	No times have appeared from before with the body covered in wounds or pustules that come from large rotten substances.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	If it is necessary when they appear that one should perform a cauterization above each pustule head: a subtle cauterizer of willow wood, of which the point can be grasped in the fire, or of aristolochia root, or with a lenticular cauterizer.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And no times have cauterized at the beginning when they appear, according to this method, and it cannot grow new ones in front, but is broken up the excess from which they come, and are healed; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	often there is great loss of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the periphery, or at the incision of the abscess, or in the cauterization of the limb, and similar things; and it is a very painful thing to stop.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And whenever this happens to anyone, you must quickly place your finger on the wound of the vein, and press very hard until the bleeding is stopped and no more blood comes out; then apply burning olive oil cautery many times, both small and large, until they are all red; then apply I, or a great or little one according to the wound and the limb in which the artery is cut, and place the cauterizer on that vein where you hold your finger, and keep the cauterizer there until the bleeding is stopped.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if the first one fails and you lift your other hand above the vein, and the cauterizer is extinguished, then quickly take the other cauterizers that are at the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not stop doing this one after the other until the blood is stopped; and be careful that you do not burn the nerve that is next to it, and that no other harm comes over the wound; and make sure that when the artery is not cut, it cannot be extinguished directly when the artery is large, unless by one of the four methods that we have said: or by cauterization, or by extraction if it has not been treated, or by a very tight bandage, or by medicines placed on top that have power to stop blood.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever administers the tightening of ropes or other things overheated, or similar things, does not benefit unless not.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone and they have no immediate remedy or medicine present, they should put their finger index on the wound of the vein as we have said, and well tighten as much as it is stretched over the wound and over the vein; and they should not move it, but they should frequently rub with cold water until it is frozen and swollen and stretched; and they should make inquiries about what they need for cauterizing and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of remedies for tails
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter all diseases for which it is necessary to cauterize with fire or with a burning medicine, and the symptoms and causes and instruments and forms of cauteries; and I will go to this chapter from that very way so that we can find more easily what we want.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And therefore as I begin this chapter, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and for this reason it requires greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	In the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	I warn you not to undertake foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many ways of people come for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	If they come from such people who are so with their illness that they die immediately from the harm they bring to their disease, and from the greatness of its wickedness; and of these one must have fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And of these, there are those who give you their senses, and say: "Wait, I am dizzy"; and the disease is spiteful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It is not enough that you allow those who come to you with this manner, but put greater caution in your honor than in your desire, and do not open madly but wisely from what you are certain of, and which you have taken and lost; and use prognosis and indication in the treatment of your diseases for salvation to be converted; and this will help you to achieve good reputation, glory, and memory for long.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, Our Lords grant you good understanding and straightness, and if you wish to breathe from the holy inspiration of His hand, indeed.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	I have ordered you to read this chapter by examining other chapters, according to what is before or after the chapter on cauteries, which I have previously provided from head to foot, so that you can find it more easily.
dou chief plein d’aigue	The head is full of sharp points.
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	This disease often occurs in children during infancy, and when the nurse holds the child's head too tightly; and sometimes it comes from the cause that one is not restrained.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	I have never seen this disease except in children, and all those I have seen died; and because it seems to me that it is better to avoid the work in these treatments.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw a child who was suffering from a sharp pain, and the head was swelling each day until it could no longer bear it; and he thought so much of the moisture that he died, and this moisture is gathered outside the bone above the shoulder, between the skin and the bone; and the works are such if the moisture is between the skin and the bone, and the abscesses are small, then make a wide cut on the head; and let it be as long as II, until the moisture flows; and get out the shape of the spatula.
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more extensive, and the abscess is larger, then make two cuts in the shape of a cross, according to this form.
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is under the bone, and the signs that you see are the commissures of the joint open on each part, and the sharp pain that you feel when you press it with your hand from the inside, and it does not return: then it is necessary that you make three cuts in the head as follows:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, remove all the moisture.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After applying bandages and powders, and putting in wine and oil, and leaving it like this for five days; then remove it, and treat the wound with tents and counter-irritants, and keep the joint still, and gradually introduce dry meat to reduce the moisture until the member is comfortable and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is that you look for the largest opening of the abscess and the sharpest blade; for it is never in front, never behind, never on the right, and never on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Then make the incision where the abscess is open, and fill it with the sharpest blade, and cut according to what you can do; and be careful not to cover the artery; and if blood flows, the wound may die from the flow of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	of return
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When it happens to anyone with a disease called "cataract" in the eyes or in the pupil, and the disease is ancient, and medical treatment does not help much, then the cure is to cauterize with what they cover the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	It is therefore necessary, while you are looking at it, that the bones make their head; after that, he rubs the bone of a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then he holds the bones to the whole cloth; then look where the vein is bleeding, and the ears on both sides are soon stopped; then sign the ears of an incision, then cover both with a piece of adhesive of two parts, until the wound comes just to the bone, and that it be through the width of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see, push the adhesive away from the artery and cover it above, cutting as it should through the middle.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, if the blood flows continuously from above.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open at first feeling, then measure the amount of space in three fingers, then sign and apply pressure to the bone; and what is necessary for the arrow to put outside is six centimeters, and perhaps a little more or less, depending on how much the wound can tolerate, and the replenishment of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains above the bone not pointed downwards, if the coping that we put does not come out, then strain the wound and tie, and the treatment of ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	of the shoulder
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When the ancient shoulder dislocation comes, and the cautery is old, due to the moisture of tears and chills in the temples and old age and similar things, and it is treated by methods of medical cures and nothing else helps, then we should strain the arteries of the temples and cauterize them as we have told.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of extracting them is such that the hairs of his temples face backwards, and listen to the artery that opens in the temple, because it opens well by its beating, and it is not replaced except in some men who are too cold; and if it is replaced, then strain the skin with some cloths, then rub the skin with any rough cloth, and raise the skin with hot water until the artery clearly opens; then take the spatula of which this form is made:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then shave the light skin gently until you reach the artery, then trace it upwards with pincers, and remove many threads that are attached to each part; and if the artery is thin, turn it back to the tip of the forceps, then cover that part according to the amount of the two joints.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not covered, it will not heal completely.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And draw out blood from the sixth vein, just to the third; and if the artery is large, it is necessary that you tie it in two turns of a strong silk thread, which does not allow any bleeding before the scab of the wound has formed, and then remove the excess between the two ties in the same hour, and then, if you see, cauterize the wound with the cautery knife up to the bone until the joints are covered; and this is the best work, if the pains are not feverish and he is of hot constitution.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the fire cautery is to end the moistures: for it is of greater help to moistures.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Where it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fill the wound with old cotton and place on top well-made bandages; and when they are removed, one should care for drying medicines that make new skin grow, and bandages, until they are healed; and if without cutting the artery as much as you have worked, then hasten to cover it with a cauterizer, or use the wound of glass and hold it tightly in your hand that the wound may not be stained; and if you do not have this present, then place ice on the wound so long as the wound is not frozen, and raise the wound with cold water until it is stopped, and held tightly as it should be; and what is more difficult and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this cauterizer cutting from II parts, but the cutting should be well made to last longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	When instruments are too tightly fitted, they hold less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus; et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And there should be between the two knives a great space, and then when you have marked out the two lines, and you melt the hot iron above as far as it comes to the bone, and cover the vein in two lines; and they should be separated between the two cuts because it is not known how much of this cauterization is needed in total; and this is the form of the cauterization:
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes are descending from the veins that are above the surface of the cheek, and it does not profit much from medical treatment, and you see the face of the patient becoming crooked, and feels or frontal pain as if from a fever; and if they are held and moistened so that the hairs of the papers are soaked, and the papers are discolored, and burned by the heat of the tears, then it is necessary to use this treatment.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And they called the old "wound dressing," and you should make three cuts evenly along the length of the front; and one of the cuts should be as if two teeth are lifted up and down, and the others two on the ribs above the papers, and guard against incising the arteries that are on the ribs above the papers; and move your hand away from the continuation of the two jaws, and for each wound apply a quantity of three doses across the join; and have prepared a piece of sponge and much cloth to soak up the blood, then fill the space with the following form:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	from the incision that is made from the temple just after the second incision; and scrape off all the matter that is between the two cuts to the entire face which is above the bone, then make another incision from the other side of the same second incision, and then extract this pus.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	if you put the instrument called "curette" into the first cut, it is very sharp on one side and blunt on the other, and this is its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	and place the sharp edge of the instrument towards the wound and the blunt side towards the bone, and scrape until it reaches the other cut.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And for all the vessels that descend from the head as far as the eyes until the incision is continuous to the depth that opens the vein, and then make another incision in the same place on the other side; then extract the blood evenly, and express the lees for the blood taken; then put a piece of old cotton in each incision, and put moistened cloths made of wine and oil and vinegar, and guard that abscesses do not come; and the patient should lie down, and be treated with great amounts of vinegar, then the ointment of basilicon with rose oil, and other cures that are used to treat wounds, until they are healed.
dou reume des eulz	renewal of the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When anyone comes to have cataract surgery as usual, and you see the eyes closed and small, and weakened vision, and burnt papers; and the hairs are shaved, and where the shaving is done, there is pain, and the eyelids are swollen; therefore, by these accidents that those materials and cataract come out only from many incisions, and the movement that is, is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And it is that you command the eyelid to turn back, then make a great cut across the eyelid, and another one wide at the edge of the eye.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And it begins from the temple on the right side to the temple on the left, and let the incision be just to the bone; and move your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move at the jaw; and when the bone is exposed, wipe out all the blood with a sponge, and then clean between the two lips of the incision and put in old cotton, and linen; then bandage with moistened cloths in wine and oil, and guard against pus forming; when it is removed, it is necessary to rub the bone until charcoal begins to appear, then treat with things that are cauterizing, like char.
En teil maniere: pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of collyrium, and make a poultice; and administer it in these wounds to insert charcoal through all.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the deafness of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that sticks in the ears is one of the four things: grains, or beasts, or stone of mine or similar thing like iron; or seeds, such as peas, beans, or peas; or a running thing like vinegar and oil and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it sticks in the ear stone or other kind of thing that does not fit well in the ear, do not let it grow in the ear, if you put the ear to the sunlight.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see an arrow, if there is any drop of purple oil or hemlock oil, then apply extraction; and the way to do this is to make them spit out their conditions, and when they sneeze, cover their nostrils, and place pieces of cloth or wool around their ear; and hold the ear upwards.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Often it comes out by this treatment; and if it does not come out, apply extraction with thin needles, of which this is the form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it comes out by the thin needles, it is good; if not, apply extraction with a thin, double-edged needle; and if it does not come out by this method, make a rain gutter and blow the head of the gutter or the earwax out of the ear strongly, and stop up the ear with molten wax so that nothing can enter with the gutter; then remove it properly, for often it comes out in this way as we have said; and if it does not come out in any manner, take some glue and put it on the ears, and place some instrument that is sharp at the point to make, and put a little cotton around; then press the glue above the arrow or whatever else, and remove it.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If she does not jump from all these things that we have said, then quickly cut the ear as soon as pus and blood come out, and spasms; and the way of the cut is that you first make a small incision in the place of the pain in the head, and extract the arrow according to its virtue, then put the pain between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear where the grease depends; and let the incision be as a moon, until you come to the stone, then remove it according to your power, and suck it vigorously to your mouth; and the cure until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is small and it swells, administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, administer the following remedy in a thin, subtle form according to this method:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and administer an incision of that small one.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not make it too small when you think the grains are moist due to earwax, until you have made many pieces; then extract them with thin forceps and at the succession, as we have said, so that the extraction is aligned.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the case of earwax that falls into the ear, it is necessary to use nasal drops and clear the ear with a lot of old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let it lie across the very ear itself where the sharp is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it jumps out because of the wind, that's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If not, take many thin stones according to the length of your finger and lightly heat them in the fire; and put the hairs of one's ear, or a small piece of it, on one stone, and hold it with the other hand from the other foot, and firmly press another stone against the stone that is in the ear; and do not stop doing this stone by stone until the sharp is all out, and thus it will all be out; and if you see, take a thin stick, and burn one of the hairs in the ear, and the other hair grasp with fire until the thinnest stick is burned; then do the same for the others as we have said in the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of an animal, if it is small in size, such as a mouse and similar things, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is large enough to be felt, then use pincers for extraction; and it is the lightest thing to remove that is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms inserted into the ears, if you treat them as we have said in the division and use distillations, and the treatment does not help, then it is necessary to look at the ear in the sunlight: if there are no worms, then remove them with delicate pincers, and if there are none, then take the cainne of the form that is here.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And it should be tight below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And push the sharpest point in the ear according to the amount of pain, then it will often succeed completely; do this as often as all the arrows are visible.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not comply, then push cotton around the wound as I have said in the stone; and if they still do not succeed, administer distillations that the ancients have used in the opening of arrows, and you will find them where you can treat with distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with this instrument, then this is the form as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And let there be silver or lead pins inserted into the small pores, and above the surfaces to drip; and to press within the distillation with a well-made lead tool for this purpose, and if you see the razor and wrap it around the tip evenly with cotton; then pour your oil or juice, and whatever medicine you see in the can, and the can should be in the ear; then squeeze through the razor to all the cotton, and press your hand evenly until the oil is distilled or comes out of the ear; and feel the pain inside, and let the distillations be a little warm at the fire as they are distilled into the ear; and guard that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the stoppage of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without some sort of hole in their ears; and this same thing happens to men by stoppage of a wound, or by a splinter inside the ear, and this stoppage never comes from within the ear, if one cannot see it; and it always comes from outside the hole, and one can see it well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Therefore, that which comes from within, if one cannot see it, is a bad situation in many positions, and in this one where one sees, it is necessary to put the ear in the bad position towards the sun; and look inside: if you see the opening completely through this space of which there is the form:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And let the fire cauterize all around and behind the ear, so that it does not burn the ear; if the plug is of horn or leather of the ear, hold it with subtle forceps, and the cover lightly, until that char is completely hardened.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the plug is in the ear, take a thin, light razor and heat it slightly over the fire, then place it on the leather of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the plug that the patient feels grated at the ear, slightly perforate, and make sure not to injure the nerves of the ear; then place in the ear a tent according to the width of the pore, and moisten it with Egyptian mummifying oil.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do not touch the wound until it is fully healed, or take a tent and moisten it with rose petals, and powder it with broken glass; and if you see pus coming out of the ear, then remove the tent and use another tent made of rose petals and wax, until the pus stops coming out; then cure it until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if blood comes out, soak an sponge and wet it with cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other cures that stop the flow of blood which are either treating the distillations.
de la char des papieres	of the paper's charcoal
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This is the charcoal that comes from paper when it is wet and then dry, if it is necessary to extend them with tongs and pliers, and the copper of a spatula from its roots; then put it on the limb vitriol broken.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And without removing it, if the cauterize of the subtle lens cautery, and the cauterizer after the incision is good; and often they are repaired, nothing remains from their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	of the gravel
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Often in papers, one finds things that seem to be gravel in their form and hardness, and because of this disease is called "hail," and it is an assembly of large moisture above and below; the workings are such: if the hail moves from one part to another, it is a light thing to know; then making it wide, then scraping each part lightly, then taking it as pincers, and the copper.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you do not cover it with copper without piercing the paper, it does not harm the patient; and if the fender is large, it assembles at a seam, and the cure as long as it is healthy; and if it is small, do not make any force, for the pain will restore it soon and cause injury.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the splinter is large and descending into the depths of the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper, and place the splinter in some tweezers, and hold it with a cloth on one side and the other; and if the paper is displaced by the incision, it does not matter; and when the splinter is removed, pour some boiling salt water into the ear until the wound is clean.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Exinach is a fat that is wiped onto papers above, and it has more in children than in adults, and it hurts their eyes, and they vomit it in the morning, and they cannot look at the light of the sun because their tears stick to their eyes; and because they lie on their faces, they sleep on their backs, and their papers are outside their eyelids moist with exinach that appears in the oil.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the joint to your touch and feel the extrusion among all.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the manner of the work is such that the hairs put their head in your hand; then take a cloth of linen, and make a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that contains extrusion from each part, then place it on top of them; and press with your fingers on one side and the other, so that the extrusion is assembled within the circle; then cutting into the moisture at the spatula make a slit of a wide size, and not be any bigger than the wound made to the vein; and cut the skin until you come to the extrusion; and in many positions the extrusion comes from the slit, in the form of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Extract the honey from the entire piece of cloth between your thumbs, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is spread; and be careful not to insert in the wound, that you do not bring all the poison along with the oil, that you do not harm it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if it does not come out at the beginning of the wound, lightly scrape the wound until it opens; then extract it as we have said, then wipe the cloth with soft and rough, and put on the limb, and wrap in many layers.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such men who bruise the cloth and put it on to corrupt the moisture that remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the healer as long as he is healthy.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient comes to the healer with an abscess that is not drained, then the healer should apply moistening poultices until he is healthy.
des poilz des papieres	hairs of papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc IIII manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs are born on papers that are not natural, and are awakened, if they harm the eyes, and bring on diseases as tears and softening of the papers and the whiteness, until it is the cause of the destruction of the eyes; and the cure is in four ways: either by fire together with cauterization, or by medicine according to the time before or the chapter of cauterization, and is done either by incision and stitching or by caustics, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary to place the head of the injury in your hand, then return the paper of oil to your right hand; if it is converted, it is good; if not, if there is a needle at the end of the thread above; and so it is on the other side of the paper or where the hairs grow between these hairs, and draw the thread above the paper, and return the scraper; then in the part outside the paper, outside the hairs adjusted, all the surface from the great arm to the small; then extract the thread, and place outside the paper a small piece of cotton and linen, then above the paper a figure of a bandage, like the belly of a martyr, and throughout it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity you saw lift the paper which is divided to all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	If there is a person who has skill in cutting a great quantity of paper according to how the paper is soft; then making all the space above the two lines that you have marked, and beginning from the large calf down to the small; and let one of the wounds near the natural hairs at the base of the root, then cut the thread in one of the two angles of the needle, then scrape off the skin; then gather the two lips to a seam of an needle with all the subtle thread, and suck the blood, and dry the superfluity of the threads above the two sides at any things glueing, if you see that it is made; and if not, if you do not have care, then leave the seam and the threads just after three or four days; then cure the wound without sewing things dried and constricted, because the paper reunites to the suddenness of the wound and the assembly of it, but the seam is dry (as they say the ancients), and it is work without fear; and if another way: and that you sign the paper in a shape which is as equal to the shape of the mirror, with three threads according to the form that is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then apply this remedy which is above in equal parts according to the form that is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you cannot hold the needles, and the thing is not even, take a needle or one with a thread, and place the thread in the form; and the other thread over the great arm, and the second thread over the small one, and gather together the threads equally; then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin above where you have sewn, as we have told you, then gather the two lips of the wound by sewing, and cure it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with ointment and similar soothing substances; and once the hair of the paper has been converted: if you must use what we have said about the incision; but the sewing on one side and the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The care of dogs is as follows: first, fold the paper and make two holes in it according to what I have said, then make two thin lines as long as the paper and its width; and place the two ends where you hold the threads; then bring them together subtly above the paper and oil, and strain the two needles from the two parts to form a whole; and leave it in this way for some time, and the skin that is stretched will die and rot and putrefy until it falls off.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it takes too long, if the coping is strong, then cure it as long as it is healed; and when the wound has been suppurated, and if the paper has been lifted, and the hairs will not grow back; and this is the form of the two needles that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The work is such that you grasp a thin needle, and you boil the thread of silk softly; then assemble the hairs and pull out one and the other softly, and let the length of the threads be a palm long; then order the other thin silk thread briefly in the hunt, and pull out the main thread; then place the hairs on your skin so that the work is completed, for it is a subtle and delicate work, then boil the needle through the entire length of the hair at its base, and let it pierce the paper gently until you remove it from the natural hair; then stretch the hair up to the hunt, and boil the hair in the hunt, if there is one or two or three or more; then stretch your hand so that the hairs come out entirely on the paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the wound is treated and the hairs do not grow back with it, then treat the wound with the oil as directed, until the wound has healed completely and you can see it through the oil; then apply the oil and let it remain for two or three days, until the hair grows back in its place and grows on the scar; and if the hairs are small, accompany them with a long hair from a goat, and raise it with the other, until it is extended and then remove it.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the preparation of the oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease, which is called "aleacrati" or the "porking", comes from the oil, there are two ways: one natural and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it occurs by the wound, or by the barber or the cauterization, and by similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the method of treatment in this case is to break that suture, and dry the lips of it, and put inside tents of linen, and bind it until it is healed; and you should only use in its cure things that dry and restrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	Because if you do this, the disease returns worse than before; but in the work of things that soften, such as fenugreek; and the root of aquilegia or high and seed of linen are cooked, and an ointment of dayquilon melted in any of the oils, and there is wrapped a tent, and its cure is this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasures of your care are that you take precautions so that it does not become malignant according to its former form; and this work that we have said is only intended as an introduction to this disease, that it does not return to its former form.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the oil that comes in the ear
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease that is truly called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accidental one comes from wounds and cuts and cauterization and similar things; and the way of the work in this is that you grasp a needle, in which it has double thread, and the thread in the ear, and make it pierce from the right side to the left, so that the thread comes out in the other ear; then the ear is held above all the needle, and the covering is wide.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the paper returns to its proper shape according to what it should be, it is good; if not, take the razor and put it in the wound, and return the paper, and make two cuts or at the corners of the incision you have made; and let the two corners of the incision that you have made be as if they were angles so that when they are assembled, the shape is as if it were a letter that has not «I greek»; then take that char, according to the quantity that its cost is away from, of what teaches the paper, then add the two missing parts and the thread of linen; then the care of what we have said about the medicines that soften, and tents, until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the patient's illness comes from a cut or a stitch or a cauterization, it is necessary to make a plain cut outside of the hairs and the papers, as I have previously mentioned; then clean between the two sheets of a tent, as I have said; and one must do the work according to the form of the illness, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters apply various means of all possible methods to make the figure return to its natural form; and the patients themselves, according to what is necessary for the work and the instruments in many different positions.
dou soudement de la papiere	The paper is soaked with.
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this stitching is done by many people in a certain way, the paper above is soaked with the white of oil, and it cannot move or do its work naturally, then you should put the tip of a razor outside the paper, and lift it up; and stretch it with pincers, until you scrape off what is hard on the subtle spatula, which should not be too sharp or too thin, so that the pain cannot bear that the spatula is too sharp or burns the oil; and your incision, from which you scrape this assembly, should be lightly, so that the paper returns to its natural form; and this whole assembly is healed, and nothing should ever be done in acidic salty oil, and lifted with mild sweet oil, and with collier; then put between the paper and the oil a linen cloth, and put on the oil moistened wool in abundance of water; and afterwards use the collier and other things until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the joint of the oil
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	There are two ways the joint is affected: one is nervous and resembles a hard, dry face, and another that is not nervous but resembles frozen white moisture, which when touched with iron and heated with pincers, cannot be moved; both start near the large arm and grow slowly until it covers the entire eye and light and movement of the oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of incision is that the hairs are placed in your hand, then open the eyes; and hold the paper in your hand, then bend the joint with pincers of small double strength, and extend it above; then take a needle, and put some horsehair, or cow, or beef, and strong thread; and double the point of the needle a little and insert it into the joint, and push the whole needle through the joint, and tie the joint with a thread and extend it above, and scrape all the hair on the side of the joint that shows the pearl and the silk to the hair just below, then scrape the remaining at the base of the arm to all the subtle spatula and with small forces, and leave the natural skin of the arm, so that by the incision the tears do not flow as usual; and once it was extended only to the bone, and with the thread, as we have said; then scrape all the soft tissue of which this is the form:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be careful that the spatula does not touch the charred flesh and break it, and that the prickle is not perceived; and after the incision pour a little bit of broken silk oil, and a collar made of litharge, and leave it just above the other side; then treat as necessary until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the joint is not nervous, and you cannot insert the needle, and the incisions cannot enter, often this resemblance of a joint from medicines; and they are born as I have told in the division, and if you see it covered, then apply oil to the pain, and take the spatula lightly with a small amount according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And gently rub the joint above subtly, and if you see that it does not ease and the reason is close, then drip from your mouth into the oil collier made of litargire and red collier and broken silk, and extinguish the oil just after; then begin the other work according to this same method, until it is completely healed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary in the oil, as with an abscess, then milk it, and cure the abscess thoroughly until it is healed, then begin the work again as before, until it is completely healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh on the arm is black at night due to great harm, then pour it onto a cloth and not all at once, so that tears do not come out; then apply a red-hot iron that is made from litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the hair that grows above the eyebrow
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Some men never grow red hair, and it covers the eyebrow and is held above the papers and turned to the defense, and it looks like a balcony of balauste; and the work is such that the hairs put their head in your healthy skin, then the work cuts all those hairs with convenient curves to this eye, and supports it with force; then cover the first hair, and go all scraping to the razor just at the end, and make sure you do not burn the oil at the work; and let the incision of the spatumile that we have said in the incision of the nail and as small forces of which we take the base, as it forms after this chapter the demonstration; and when the incision is made and all the hair is removed, then use the oil of silk broken or you distill red-hot iron and similar corrosive medicines, and put on the oil behind cotton with abin of wool, so that it is assured of aposteme; and if nothing remains, and the pain is not covered, and you doubt aposteme, then leave the oil and cure the aposteme with calming aposteme; then return to your work until it is healthy, and thus make all hairs adjusted in the oil by this similarity.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But it is necessary that you alleviate the care of each weakness of the natural way; and of the accidental way, in the work of iron; and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that this member is suffering from that work.
des voines des eulz	of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	Red veins that are covered over the eye, and take away from the view their work and weaken the eye always.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	The work is therefore to the first that you look at this eye, in which there are red veins, and outside, and there is no other disease besides the red veins; then the work is done in such a way: command the patient to put his head in your healthy hand, then gently rub those veins all around according to his wisdom, and let the rubbing be subtle double according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be two times per degree in the body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then gently apply those forces in the veins, and wipe the blood away an hour after another, until you remove those forces from the oil; and guard that you do not pierce the oil with points of spatulas, and do this work at noon before the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not cover those forces; and when you have done this, pour green and red colloidal silver into the oil to corrupt what is left behind.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot collect all the blood in that hour, then apply a salve over the oil of things that calm the pain of the eyes, and let it stay for some time until the pain is relieved and you are sure of no abscess, then begin again according to this method as long as they are healed; and this is the form of the forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the oil fistula
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The mirror calls this "arissati" fistula: when you treat it with cauterization and medicine boiling according to what I have said before, and it is not healed, then it is engaged in what you did above the abscess, where it should die, and drain all the moisture that is inside, until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and the blackness, then the instrument that is in its form; and it is called "hard head", and it should be made of iron from the same as the head, and pointed like a needle as it is in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	Place the broken bone above the joint, then twist it between your hands, and press your hand a little until you feel that the corruption is removed; do this once, then restore the bone with drying medicines.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the bone is set and the flesh grows, and the body of the bow is set and remains thus for forty days, and it does not reopen and is not infected, and no bad accidents occur, remove it when it is healed; if not, there is no other method than to return the fistula to the root of the nose according to this form: and you should discover the bone the second time with a needle and with wet medicines, and when it is discovered take the foret according to this form, and let the patient's head be fastened at three angles, and let the fistula be attenuated gradually until it is healed as you see.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place it above the bone of the arm, and move your hand away from the oil and the skin, then return to the full extent of the forearm until it pierces the bone and the patient feels the pain as if it is coming from the inside if they hold their hand on their neck; and when the medicine has dried, as I have shown you, and when the char is born and hardens the muscles, then apply the matter to the neck; it is a lighter thing for the pain.
de l’issue de l’oil	from the end of the oil
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes open wide and do not close, and it does not disturb the neck or cause discomfort, then you must bind the pain; then cleanse, then apply leeches or hot compresses to draw out the pus, then place the oil on a mixture of acacia, aloe, incense, and sarcocollis, and then strain the oil, and apply it with bandages and cloths; the manner of the cloths is that you take cloths that are sufficiently soft and double each one in four, and then place one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eyes have needed; then strain it through a cloth that is very hard and form, and start the leeches again to draw out the pus without causing harm; then remove the leeches and leave the oil strained day and night, and if the pain remains, it is good; if not, restart the application of bandages, cloths, and leeches until they are healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	the tearing of a vein
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions occur in the vein, it is opened and there are many papers like a piece of resin, and it is unsightly to see; therefore, if you see it covered, the work is such that you should insert a needle into the root of the part below this above, then insert another needle or a double thread of the arm part; and perforate it, and leave the first needle according to its position; then tie the double thread around the part of the vein, and hold it well, then remove the needle and put some oil mixed with honey on the wound, and let it stay until the thread is cut with the vein, then care for comforting things until the wound is healed; and never restrain the wound by a bandage of cloth, as long as it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes appear greatly swollen, pierce them with a fine needle that comes from under the oil, and wring out the moisture of the albuginea and descend upon the eyelids, and enter immediately; then extract them until they are healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	from under the oil
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease that is called "alcunnati" is nothing other than a bubble that is assembled in the oil, resembling a sharp descent, and it is not sharp; and the manner of the appearance of the work is such that you make the pain sit on the seat prepared and straight, then take the head between your hands from two parts, and the movement as much as you see the bubble come to the top of your eyes; then let it go, and do not descend and do not be disassembled by the light, and see the things as they were; and if they do not descend, it is sharp, and if the things that descend from the bubble are not prepared as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you hold the hurt part between your hands, then take the fine spatula and place it under the cornea, and with the continuation of the conjunctive with the cornea and the eyelid, until the hole is closed; and when it is closed, then pour hot oil mixed with honey, or hot honey or fenugreek, then treat it with other treatment until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	of the hot oils
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have had similar cases in the division, and what is needed to pierce; if it works according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	It is necessary that you make the hurt part sit between your crossed hands, away from the light for the sun, and the healthy oil tightly; then put the paper of the oil to your right hand if the eyes are crossed, or to your left hand; then take in your right hand, if the eyes are crossed, the instrument called «almagda», or to your left hand, if the eyes are not crossed; then place the point of the instrument above the cornea by the thickness of a thread in the blemish of the oil at the part of the minor arm, then strike the instrument called «almagda» vigorously, and keep your hand until it pierces the blemish of the oil, and feel that almagda comes to the empty thing; and it is necessary that the measure of the way almagda be at the beginning of the space that is from the gold to the end of the needle; and this is the cornea of the oil; if you see the bone in that paper for the clarity of the cornea, and then put the instrument above or the hot oil.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If he is now sharp-sighted, he will see the hairs before him and the instrument in his eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After resting for a little while, and if he is now sharp-sighted again, put the flame with the instrument, and when it is stuck and does not move, gently turn your hand back and forth; then put a small amount of cotton on his eye and leave it inside.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then put by default the eye is cleaned with a soft cloth soaked in rose oil and plenty of water, and bind it with clean oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those who are of our household, put on top of the wound with plenty of water.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if it cannot enter the oil due to its hardness, because there are men who have very hard eyes, then you must use the tool called "alberit", which has this shape:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	Therefore, pierce only the conjunctive part, and do not let it move too much in front, but make the eye sleep subtly, then gently open the hardness, as we have said; and at the end of the work compare the patient's condition to the drowsiness that occurs, in which he sleeps on his back in the dark room; and be careful of all movements, and take light foods, and do not move his head to the right or left, and tie it according to its disposition just after midnight; then release him in the same dark house, and check his sight, and show him some things, and then return the bandage to the next day; and you should not do this in the morning of the care or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you raise the eyelid, for the sharp pain.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	When abscesses come, you should apply hot oil before the seventh hour, and strengthen it with what quenches abscesses; and when it is calmed, remove the cloth and put a new one on its face to cover any opening, and let it stay in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then go out of the house little by little, and convert it into its own case; and do not let any disciple intervene in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	Some came to us who was of the Yrach, who told us that in some countries people did something called a "lancet", because of which the wound heals, but I never saw any in our land, nor have I read anything about it in the books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the similarities of the forms of almonds, because those who do not know them see them as such; and they are made of pure tin.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And they have the same thinness in their heads and the backs in three angles.
de la char sor le neis	of the char for the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	Never do they grow or appear as noses that are twisted in various ways, of which there are some that resemble scorpions at the top; and if there are such, or if there is a swollen nose of bad color, and if there is a soft nose of good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In that case of those noses that are soft and not twisted, it is necessary that you make the pain between your hands against the sun; and work their nostrils, and pour the quicksilver into those noses, and take them out; because this is what you can support with the subtle ague of one part, until you see that that nose is all healed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains nothing that can be removed with subtle and delicate instruments, then open it completely; and if it is an abscess, clean it as it should be; and if it is malignant abscesses, hasten and cauterize it until the wound is no longer wet and all the pus is removed, then pour or wash with vinegar and water.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If it opens in the palate, and moisture enters into the palate, then wipe it clean; and if it does not perforate as it should, then there is a bone above, to which instruments do not come out to cut: therefore you must go with a piece of linen thread a little thick, and be careful of your hands, and have space between each nail as much or as little; and put the bad parts of the thread in the mouth of the patient, and draw it through the nose until it comes out through the nostril; and many times they do this with children in schools, and it is an easy thing for those who want to do it; then hold the part that comes out through the nostril with one hand, and the other part that comes out through the mouth with the other hand, and clean them alternately as we have done.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Do this until you know that the newts have not corrupted that cloth, then remove the filth, dampen the blood, and moisten the thread with an Egyptian eye salve, and return it to the nose as before; do this three times or more, until the ointment has corroded all that remains of the cloth; then place or put a plaster on the nose for several hours until it is healed, and if it requires medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument for purging the head, by which one distills oils and medicines into the nose:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And it should be of silver or tin, resembling an open lamp, like a cup, and the conduit is also used in this way; and if you see, make a closed cup, and let the instrument be polished to purge the head; and have one hand on the head to hold when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the head to the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a disease arises in the head of the nose that is called "telul", and it grows and becomes large to the point where it looks like a thing; and because of this, it is necessary to cover it at the beginning, and then put the hot iron or the burning medicine on it; and if it is difficult to cover it when it is large, if it is hard, of poor color, and has poor sensation: if you do not touch it with iron because it is a hidden abscess, for when you cover it once, great harm comes to the pain; and if the abscess is softly touched, not with iron color, and you see that you can completely cover it, then remove the pain and the covered thing, and cure the nose of similar and restricting things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nose is cut off and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	there are many solutions that come in one of these cartilaginous parts, which is only slightly beneficial to some people.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, if the wound is fresh and full of blood, then look to see if the lips are split on both sides; and then stitch them together, and care for it until it heals; and if the lips are already scarred on one side or the other, then you must burn all the parts that are not healed, then assemble the two lips together, and hold them in place, and powder with powder of dragon's blood, and frankincense; and put the powders on a piece of strong plaster or another plaster bandage, and let it soak through, then care for the wound until it heals.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The method of sewing is such that you assemble the thread: either with needles, as we have said in the stitching of the belly; or with thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses on the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	Some people have abscesses inside the lips, which are hard and small, and smaller and larger; therefore, it is necessary to turn the lips, and cut under each one, and take out the pus with forceps and clean every part; then apply the wound after incision with broken glass ground, until the wound is no longer wet; then apply a poultice of dry things until the wound is healed.
de la char des gencives	of the toothache
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times, toothache arises from the gums being injured, which the ancients called "albulus"; therefore, it is necessary to support it with forceps, and cover its root, and let out the pus or blood; then put on the affected tooth vitriol crushed, or other powders that strengthen and dry; and if the toothache returns after the incision, and often does, then cover it again, and cauterize: if it does not return after the cautery; and these are the forms of instruments for covering.
des sordens	deafness
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Never assemble teeth at the root of the tooth, between the gums, and the sharp and unpleasant scarces; and sometimes black and yellow and green teeth are between the gums, as corruption comes to the gum, and are foul-smelling teeth. So you should place the pain between your hands, and its roots should be in your holy place, and cut off the teeth or the scarces that appear, until nothing remains; and thus make black and green, and yellow and other stains, until they are cleaned; and if you remove what is at the first layer, it is good; but if not, start again from the second day and the tool, until you have removed everything; and be aware that teeth have various forms of instruments to remove, according to what the work shows, because the razor that removes teeth has different forms than the one that removes between the teeth; and these forms and others should be with you prepared.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	When treating a tooth for pain that you delay drawing as much as you can, because no one should do this; for it is a very high substance, so we have no excuse to draw.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Therefore, when the tooth is forced to be drawn, you should be certain of the tooth's root.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Often the pain of the tooth is relieved, and one should be careful that it is a holy tooth, and draw the good tooth; and then the pain does not depart, until the evil is extracted, for we have already done this to these saints; and when you are certain of the tooth's root, it is necessary that you scorch around the tooth in all directions; then loosen it with your fingers or subtle forceps at the first and second point, until it is well dislodged, then firmly hold the forceps; and let the one who has the tooth in their mouth between their teeth, and hold it still so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After straightening the tooth correctly without breaking, and if it does not jump back, take one of these tools and push it gently into each part lightly, and shake it as you did first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the tooth is perforated and broken, it is necessary to fill it with cloths where the holes are; and if the extraction is subtly attached to the teeth, so that it does not break when extracting; and it is very important to cover around the gum to relieve the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And be careful not to break it, and that a part remains, and again give the pain by the greater evil of the root more severe pain from the first.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And beware that you do not act in such a way as the ignorant physicians who, by their haste and audacity, break the cart once and for all, and do not bring back what we have told; but they bring about great disease through the roots that they delay, or through the cart that they break, as we often have seen; and when the density is drawn, if blood comes out, which often happens, use the wound with boiled wine or vinegar and salt; and if it continues to come out, use the wound with vitriol broken; and if it does not work, cauterize.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The forms of instruments, by which one moves the first tooth, should be long and broad, so they do not double back when you pull the tooth; and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should be thick enough so they do not bend when you pull, and they should be made of good iron, and they should have sharp teeth to hold.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the tooth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains when pulling, then you must place soft cotton moistened in oil or water on the wound.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	until the wound is softened, then pull the pliers which are called "algefri", of which the patient seems like a beak; and they should be made inside like a wedge and this is the form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these needles, it is necessary that you scrape around the root entirely, and there you put the instrument called "althali", which is a spoon, of which this is the shape:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And if it is too large so that it does not break in half, and if the root jumps out through the hole, it is good; if not, if you help with all the instruments, of which the shapes come hereafter:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one helps with this instrument that has two prongs, of which this is the shape:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other forceps that are before in the range of the teeth, and with this instrument that seems like large needles, of which this is the shape:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And this instrument should not break, and it is sharp with many instruments of dense material; and also other instruments, which are not counted among them; and the wise masters subtly find their own instrument, according to what their work and the disease demonstrate, because there are some diseases where the ancients did not teach an instrument for the diversity of them, and if they break the cart or other bones, or if it hurts, if they search for instruments that are necessary, as I have said, and help with gestures, of which this is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And be strong and well holding to hold the bone, that it does not escape, but can hold and remove; then restore the limb with medicines suitable for it, and if there is pus in the bone, and it is small, then use this tool:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not according to the natural course, and the shape is ugly, and especially in young women, it is necessary that you remove the tooth after the tooth, and it is not in the right place, and no one can be made or polished: then use this tool; and if it is stuck with the tooth, take this tool which has the shape of a small beak, and it is similar to the small beak, and it is made of iron and sharp at the end:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the copper is slowly and slowly placed in the mouth for the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the other teeth, and if it appears that one can be removed, then the copper is removed with a small force as follows:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	And it is also like the copper of which the needles are made; and in this way, the copper is slowly and slowly placed in the tooth for a short time, so that it does not move until it pierces; then the plane is used at the end to remove any roughness, and if the tooth is too sharp and it bleeds the tongue, then the sharpness must be removed until it is even, so that it does not bleed the tongue or corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	when they are pulling teeth
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	when they are pulling teeth, either by percussion or by falling out, and the pain cannot be restrained from the jaw that it does not chatter, and you treat them with restrictive medicines, but it does not help; then you should restrain them with a gold wire, for the silver wire becomes green and rotten, but the gold never changes; and let the wire be neither too thin nor too thick, according to the quantity of the space between the teeth; and if you see the teeth approaching each other, take the wire and double it between the two healthy teeth, then place the affected teeth between the healthy ones, as many as there are or more, until you reach the other side of the healthy tooth; then begin to cover the part where you started, and gently and skillfully restrain your hand, so that it does not move at all; and let your wire be tied to the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then tie the broken tooth with a thin wire, and assemble it, and place it between the healthy tooth, and keep it in such a way that it does not bleed the tongue; then keep it so tight as it can hold, and if it slips, or the wire breaks, then tie it with another wire; if it holds, it will serve in such a way throughout its length, and this is the form of the teeth and the arrangement of two healthy teeth, and two missing teeth, as you see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth breaks, if it is reset in its place, from fresh to fresh, as we have said; and it does not interfere with any part that is not wise and suffering, and never once is the shape of a bone tooth of a goat made, and it is placed in the place of the defect, and it is kept tight as we have said, and it holds and serves in such a way throughout its length.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	to cut through the cartilage of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	There is no time when the cartilage of the tongue comes out of its place naturally or by nature, as it is born with it; or by accident of a wound; and the works are such that you cut through the wound of the mouth, and hold the head in your own, and lift the tongue; then cut through the nervous cartilage of the wide, until the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if it is hard or not, and it is by severe wounding, if you boil the herb and cut through the wide gently; and beware that the wound does not become too wide, for the artery which is outside; and when you have done, lift the head of high rose and vinegar, or high cold water, then put out of the tongue a linen tent; and treat the wound each night, so that the wounds do not stick together.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	If blood comes out, put broken glass on the wound; and if it does not stop bleeding, cauterize it with slow-heating iron, which is good for the wound; then treat it with other treatments until it heals.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see that the wound is of a yellowish or black color and hard, and if it does not hurt, do not touch it, for it is a chancre; and if it is declining to discharge pus, and there is moisture, pour water through the opening, and wipe it with a thin sponge, and deliver it from one side and the other; and if it does not stop bleeding at your work, put broken glass on it until it stops bleeding, then return to your work until you remove all the blood; then lift the wound off the bone and tendon, and treat it with other treatments until it heals.
des apostemes de la gorge	of throat abscesses
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	Never come from within the throat blisters that are called "godath", and they are properly called the II mandibles, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, then be careful: if it is an abscess hard of small size and of pus color, do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, as for the running of blood; but let it be until it is soft, and then you will break it, or it will break by itself; and if it is of white color and the root is thin, have prepared the instrument to cover, but first check if the abscess is at rest and is calm.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Then place the misaligned part in front of the sun, and his head should be straight, and the work the mouth and the prick between his fingers, and press the tongue out of the way from all the instrument, from which this is the form; and it should be of silver or fine iron as some knives:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Then press the tongue against all this instrument, and you see the abscess, take the needle and the hook in the amber, and draw it out as high as you can; and take nothing with you from the cloth, then cover the instrument, of which this is the form, which seems like a forceps; and all the head is bent, and one place another, and they are very sharp, and it is made of iron or steel:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this tool present, use a pair of tweezers, which is the form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And on one side, it is sharp, and on the other side, it is blunt; and when you have removed one of the thorns, remove the other in the same manner, and after the incision, gargle the sharp thorns with hot, sharp, and salty water, and if there is blood that comes out, gargle the sharp thorns with hot, sharp, and salty water, or use pounded green pomegranate skins, or mint leaves, and similar things, until the wound is clean; then treat the wound as it becomes healthy; and once in a while, other abscesses do not form in the throat except for the two thorns, so remove them in the same way as the two thorns should be removed.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman with an abscess that was lodged deep within her throat, namely a small abscess; and it had almost completely closed off her entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe due to the swelling, and could not eat or drink, and died if she remained like this for a day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so large that it had already been drained twice through both nostrils.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I therefore acted quickly, and inserted a probe into one nostril, then removed the pus through the other nostril, and cut out a large portion of it; then I repeated this process in the other nostril, and pressed on her tongue; afterwards I inserted the probe into these abscesses, and removed a part of it, and only a small amount of blood came out; thus the woman was able to breathe again, and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not stop cutting away at this abscess for a long time; the abscess kept growing back, and filled up the cavity that I had emptied, until it became very large; therefore I inserted a probe and cauterized it inside her throat: thus she was able to breathe without growing again; and I removed these parts and left only God to deal with them afterwards.
de l’uve	of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When looking at the eye, and it is protruding and long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is not too large and round, it is called "eye".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	If the eye is treated as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help much, and you see that the abscess is calm, and it is thin, then you should squeeze it; and the one that is round and not long; and if it is bloody or red or black, then you should avoid incision of it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger in pricking it.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Therefore, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, of its size and length, you should place the hairs in front of the sun, and press the tongue against the instrument that we have mentioned earlier; then make an incision in the gum, and remove it, and cover it with one or two of the instruments that I have mentioned for the incision of the two nails.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And it is necessary that you only cover the excess that is beyond the natural limit; for if you cover more, it will cause great pain to the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two nails, and treat it until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the pains are too great for the patient to bear, then it is necessary to use a cauterizing instrument to relieve the pain.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of the cautery is sharp and hot.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And the patient places his head on the safe side, and then presses the tongue against the instrument we have mentioned in the chapter of cauterization, and confuses it with very hot water, so that it is not too thick or too clear; and in the movement of this instrument, which is shaped like this:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the patient should have a hair or something to hold the medicine, like the tines of a fork, and places the instrument on top of the medicine over the uvula; and the patient lies on his side, so that saliva and muscle from his mouth flows out of the medicine inside, so that it does not drip down his throat and cause bleeding; then hold your hand on all the medicine and press it over the uvula for half an hour, until you see the benefits of the medicine and the wounds are healed; and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and blow the instrument through all the cotton into the throat, until the cotton is dry on the uvula; and do this repeatedly until the cauterization of the medicine is complete, then let it dry for four or five days; and if you have to restart the cauterization of the medicine, start again, and after the cauterization moisten it around the uvula with wadded cotton and burr, and clean what is around the medicine; and be arosed with very cold water, and be treated with gargles until they are healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer from incision than cauterization; if it is cured by fumigation in this manner, take camphor and hyssop and origanum and rue and chamomile and similar herbs, and all or some of them in a pot, and put honey in it, and make it boil; and the pot should be well sealed with strong earth, and in the pot have an instrument like this:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And it should be of silver or copper, and one of the pricks pushed into the mouth of the patient until the vapor rises to the wound through the nose, until the wound is dead; afterwards, repeat it often until the wound dries, and keep in mind that you do not make this steam at the beginning of the onset of an abscess, for many things happen; and do not make this steam except at the decline of an abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, take a cloth and place inside the head a piece of ice, so that the patient's mouth is not too much chilled; for the piece of ice does not make too much steam to burden the mouth, and it is good cure together with safety.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Often it is necessary to remove bones or spines of fish, or nothing at all; so you must take what you can see and press the tongue against the sun at all instruments, so that you can see the thing; and what does not open you and is returned in the throat, you must make vomit the bad thing as soon as the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps if the thing is removed by vomiting; or the bad things swallowed a piece of sponge, or a piece of naval, or a lettuce root, or a piece of dry bread; and tie the sponge to the thread, and then swallow it; and when it comes to the throat, it will stick, and then pull out the thing; and if it does not come out of what we have said, take the instrument according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	Let the instruments be curved at the end so that they can more easily enter the throat, and raise the head high; and beware not to touch the epiglottis, that it does not come into contact with it, or push the bone inwards; and it is better that the hairs push the instrument, because it is more likely to be the thing that is causing the problem; if it goes down, or it pulls it out entirely, evenly along the entire instrument, as far as it can go.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the throat's lining
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	The throat's lining is never treated with medicine, as I have said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and if it does not help, then look at the throat's hair to the sun, then press the tongue against the instrument that I have told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the shoe, if it is made with all small nails, or with thin tongs that are worth a penny.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if it is not worth a penny, take a hair rope, and beat the evil one in the throat with it, then beat or move the iron as often as you can.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the evil ones are all tired during the day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take a full bucket of cold water, and work the mouth, and pour it down so that he does not swallow, and move it with your hand often; and as soon as the shoe feels the cold, it will drown.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	If it does not stick as we have said, then smear the wound with asafetida, with the instrument I mentioned in the fumigation of the grape; do this many times, for it will stick without glue.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the manner of the fumigation is that you hold the pot or where there are visible coals, and place a cloth perforated in the middle over it, and in this puncture put the instrument; then pour your fumigation, and put the wound in the mouth of the can, and close the mouth, so that the fume does not escape but goes up through the nose; and the nose will now hold, and if it does not stick, start the fumigation again many times; and let the patient suffer thirst, and eat salty things and others, and do not drink any vinegar; and then the matter is that it should be cured by this regimen.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the tool used to treat the throat, which is, when one can see it, similar to curved hooks to enter the throat; and it resembles a beak, and it has a roughness of lime, so that whatever it takes, it cannot slip; and here is the shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapters on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	There are various types of abscesses, according to what memory comes after one and another in this book, and they differ in perforation and cutting; and it is in two ways that the one is in its own shape itself, and because it retains moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second manner is for those who are at the neck.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscesses of the head are different from those at the base, and the abscesses of the neck are different from those that come in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if there are abscesses that one should not pierce until the boil is dead according to its completion; and if there are such as it is necessary to pierce when they are ripe, and do not die according to their completion, as abscesses that are beyond joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come beyond joints, and it is left until it is surrounded by, perhaps because the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, by which it is the cause of contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	When the abscess is located away from the main limb, and if you delay puncturing it until it dies, it will harm the main limb; or if it is located away from the base, if you puncture it before it dies, it may not be able to stand, and it will remain crooked inside, and there will be a fistula; and it cannot be healed in the long term.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it is necessary to remove the discharge from the puncture of the abscess that is dead according to its completion, and this is when the pain is eased, and the departure of fever, and the lessening of pain and inflammation, and the debatement and the relief of the main abscess, and the other signs; and it is necessary to make the puncture wherever the abscess is most dependent on the limb, and where it opens most easily; and let the puncture be long along the body, and if the abscesses are in the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all equal places where there is no pus.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In such cases, according to the affected member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is in the throat, it is better to leave the incision until it is confirmed that digestion has been completed, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you pierce it beforehand, the blood from it will flow along with the veins, and it is plagued by much filth; and perhaps harden the lips and penetrate into it.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if any abscess that is pierced according to the wide vein, as the member has need of it.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And it is appropriate to treat small abscesses with small incisions; and large abscesses with large incisions, and many cuts according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses or it is necessary to cover them, and close; when they have become as soft as cloth, and are dead, then it is appropriate to do so as one does with boils: and if there are such that are cut in three angles, and if there are such that are covered as the skirt of a mantle, as abscesses of arrows; and if there are such that make a round cut, and other cuts and coverings.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	If they do not have a chief, as in the case of a superficial abscess, it is necessary that you puncture it clearly; and if the abscess is large, and has a great deal of pus, and you puncture it, you must not draw out all the pus in that hour, but only part of it; then suppress the abscess on the following day, then do nothing else; do this repeatedly, as often as necessary, until all the pus is drawn out; especially if the wound is of weak strength, or if a woman is carrying it, or small children, or old men who are decrepit.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the patient should never be raised too high with the release of the bow, for by chance the patient may die from the pain, and you would not be blamed.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have perceived your abscess, moisten the wound, and see if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a simple sore, treat it with linen or woolen cotton; and if it is a large abscess, and there is much pus, it is necessary that you fill each one with old cotton or shreds of linen to keep moisture away, and tie it to the body; then open, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if blood flows from your work, apply sharp cold and cooling ointment, and wipe the wound, and place it on the affected area repeatedly.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the blood flow persists, apply government and healing ointment, and use the powders I mentioned in this book, and if it is very painful, and if the wound or abscess is very sensitive, it is best to cover with tents and wipe with wine and oil; and if it is in a state of decay, and the wound is charred, it is best to cover with cloths moistened in cold water, or with wine and oil, as we have said; then drain the abscess and dress it, and treat it, as it should be, until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And it is necessary to know universally in the treatment of abscesses: now I have told you how one should proceed before treating abscesses, and here is the chapter.
des soros	of sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	When small abscesses come from the body, and there are ways that are in cloths, such as the lancing of a boil, and very many similar things.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are also large and such ones that are moist like chicken; and if there are some that are hard and rough to cut, and there is no doubt if the artery is not against it.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of the belly is such that you try all instruments called "intromissions", from which the form comes after, a thing it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, then they make it through above the long one.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is drained, scrape off any hair that contains that moisture, for it will return if you leave anything; then soak cotton in Egyptian oil, if present; if not, in vinegar and salt, and apply to the wound, and leave it there overnight; and this will correct what remains of the night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then, as before, the second day, and the third, until you are sure that it does not remain overnight; then treat the wound with ointment as appropriate, until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess is not large, then cut it according to this form, from long to short; and pour in your needles, and scrape the skin from all parts, and put all your care into drawing out the pus from where it is. And if the artery makes it opposite, do what I have told you after.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also do this with an abscess if it is pierced, and cut and treat as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And when cutting above an abscess, if it is less painful, for they are of little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if to any of these abscesses or swellings or there is no moisture, and among these were the abscess I copied or from an old woman; and I found the abscess as hard, rough, and white as a stone, and could not break it; and if one had tried to cut it, one would have made just as bad a wound as from a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses coming or from the swellings, because those that come from the chin and roots of the ears, the opening should always be at the lowest point, to let out the pus; and treat them as appropriate.
des scrophules	of scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	often have abscess on the neck, and discharge pus, and inflammation, and sometimes appear elsewhere in the body, and are very painful, and are inflamed together.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each scrofula is properly within its own side, like the neck and abscess of the head, as we have said; and similar to these scrofulas are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and some that are harmful and do not wish to follow health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	In that one which you see of good disposition to the touch, and is similar in color to the flesh, and is immovable from every part and is not deep; then it is necessary that you cut it from above, and scrape off the skin from each part, and keep the two lips of the wound as even as possible, if you have the skill, as we have said in abscesses of the head; and slowly and carefully, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or vein, and not too deeply, that the hand does not escape, and not too soon, before you cover what you do not need to.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you puncture the vein or artery, and it does not allow you to open it, put in the wound vinegar broth, or some powders that stop bleeding, and close the wound; and leave it until the abscess is soothed, and the wound is healed, and then begin to purify.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the wound is cleansed, return to your work until you complete it; then consult your knowledge if there are any small abscesses remaining, and puncture and drain them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a large vein in the root of the abscess, it is only necessary that you puncture that abscess at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it drop through it without harm; then fill the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then treat it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cut out the entire pustule, it is necessary that you bring together the two lips of the wound, and hold them in place, as there is no remaining superfluity due to the size of the pustule.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	it is necessary that you cover the root of it with a covering, and draw out the core, and hold it as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those pustules that contain superfluity, prick them where the core is still alive; and prick them thus, as we have said before, depending on the situation, then apply ointment and similar things, so that it does not corrupt what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well covered, the cure of ointment continues until it is healed.
de squinance	of dizziness
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients spoke and said of the choker of the throat; but I never saw such a thing in our land, and it is their written account.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	For those who have dizziness, it is necessary that the cut of the throat which is called "epiglottis" be avoided; and because all veins and the pore of the evil are in those who have abscess full in the mouth, or in the throat or in the hollows.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the throat pore, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the danger of strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	It is therefore necessary, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, that we cut it out of three circles or four, with a small incision through, between the two circles or by the quantity of the incision through the soft part, not in the cartilage; and those who are thus cut in the section of the epiglottis have no scar, and the wound is long healed.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the master is fearful, it is necessary that he stretches the skin of the neck all around, then cuts the cartilage until it comes to the chin; and avoid the veins of blood, if you see anything, and then cover the soft part, as we have said; and it is demonstrated by the section of the throat stream which jumped through the bone that was broken, and by the lack of voice; and leave the wound open for a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed during which one doubts strangulation, gather both lips of the wound together, and cover it completely without the cartilage; then administer medicines that cause blood to flow, until they are healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasis says that one should not do this until the throat is completely stiffened, and the limbs are judged to be dead, and the defect has left the body.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Therefore, one should cover the epiglottis for this reason that the limbs cannot be kept, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is kept from death; and because they commanded the ancient ones to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease has passed, and it has passed in three days or four. And therefore they commanded to sew the wound and cure, as long as it was healed; and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw that a young lady took a knife, and stabbed herself in the neck, and cut part of the windpipe; and I was called to heal her, and found her as if dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the arrow that had come out of it, and although she had not bled from the vein or the wound, blood flowed from the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I quickly bandaged the wound, and healed it until it was cured; and she did not die because she was able to speak, and returned to her usual state; because I believe that in the tissue of the epiglottis there is no fear.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	These abscesses are called "hernias of the throat", and are large abscesses in a yellowish color, and are common in women; and there are two ways: natural and accidental; or natural has no cause.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accidental way is in two ways: one is similar to a large swelling, and the other way is similar to an abscess that comes from us through an artery; and there is fear, and it should not be opened except by a small incision, and the proof and search are throughout the entire incision: if you find it as I have said, and cannot be removed at all, then treat it as we do with abscesses, and remove it entirely, if there is any; and search well and treat it as it should be, until it is completely healed.
des nous	For the fire cautery
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	Many methods of us are, of which I will say all the similarities; and now it is necessary that I tell the whole difference between us and the other.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that the other is cold and feverish, as long as the boils have not passed, and is accomplished by the purgation; therefore the fever and the cold rest.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With us there is neither cold nor fever nor pain, and it contains the spleen, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins as a small thing, and becomes large; and they are according to two similarities, whether dry or wet, and much of color are as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	When you come to the care of a new patient, it is necessary to first examine and try the instrument called "entromissoire", according to its form as found in the chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the manner of examining abscesses is that you press or more moist skin than you pierce in the abscess, and return your two fingers slowly, until you feel that the instrument has pierced the core, then according to the size of the abscess; then remove the entromissoire, and be careful that it does not slip.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If the running wound is colored, as I said for other abscesses; and if after the entromissoire does not come moisture, then it is fat, then cut it in a cross, and take pincers, and scrape lightly from each part and wipe the coat or where you should remove it clean with the new; and if you cannot remove it clean, then remove it in pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	And if nothing remains, it returns to us many times; and if it stays for a short time, and does not trouble you, apply some corrosive powders to the wound, close the wound, and place soothing things on the abscess, and treat other wounds until they are healed; and if it is large, cut out the two lips of the wound, and treat what causes the infection.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	And if it beats against you or another, and you are in a hurry, apply the broken glass of vitriol to the wound, and let it remain for two or three days until the wound heals, and rest the wound from the blood; then return to the copper that was left.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Here are the forms of instruments for extracting splinters, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small; and there are three quarters that are called "albaret", and one that is called "breb", and there are also three kinds: large, medium, and small, to extract splinters from abscesses; and they are like the needles that one uses for sewing, and are made of brass, or iron, or silver, and cost as much as those that are yellow, and are more effective for extracting splinters from boils; and they are three kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the pustules.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The shapes of the needles are of many similarities, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and if there are needles with two prongs in three ways; and if there are needles with three prongs, and they are also in three ways; and if there are needles with two prongs, and one prong only, and they are also in three ways; and all these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The sharpness of these is to cut, and there are some that do not cut much except from one part, from which we scrape the skin, so that we do not cut the vein or the nerve; and of these puncturing instruments are the needles with rounded ends, so that the patient does not suffer at the opening of abscesses; and they are of three kinds: large, small, and medium, as you see; and no other instrument is used except in fleshy parts, such as legs, arms, breasts, and joints, and similar places; and never made another instrument small, resembling skin scrapers for evacuating blood:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it is never put back in place which should have healing contact with the veins, and arteries, and never again according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Never inflate the breasts of some men when they begin to rot, as they seem like breasts of a woman; and they remain disfigured and swollen, and whoever wants to cure them, it is necessary to follow this form of this line b. to g.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Then scrape off the fat, and fill the wound with healing medicine using charcoal, then sew together the two lips of the wound by stitching, and treat it until it is healed; and if the breast falls down, and is molded due to its great size as in women, and if the largest line contains the smallest according to this form, from this line b. to g.; then scrape off the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitching and powders, and what is necessary in the cure, until it is healed; and if it is not healed, or the incision is not made completely, because the pains do not want to rest, or due to the drainage of blood, then it is necessary to fill the wound with moistened cotton swabs in a corrosive ointment; and let it remain until it absorbs the remaining fat and the ointment, then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses of the hocks
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come from the hocks are hard lumps or have ribs, and they contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Therefore, those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from the line .b. to the line .g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus in the abscess is drained, apply old cotton to the wound and leave it there for a day, then remove all the cotton, and treat the wound with appropriate ointment until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscesses are similar to pustules, then treat them as we have said about incising pustules, and if the wound remains open, then cauterize it as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is ruptured, and the skin above it is hard and swollen, then often there are abscesses, and just as much blood in the vein and abscess; and if you know it is for the artery, then treat the abscesses long and even; and when you feel it with your fingers, it is stiff; and when it is for the vein, it is reddish and swollen; and it is foolish to cover this abscess, and especially when it is outside the tendons and bones and muscles and many other parts, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is therefore necessary to avoid the use of iron, and the one who is in charge should also avoid it, and in the one who is inflamed with arterial blood flowing through the long skin; then open the abdomen as one would with a needle, and sever the artery of the cloth until it is exposed; then insert a needle on the other side, and pierce it with another needle from the other costeit, and hold the artery with a double thread in II leus, according to what I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples; then do not touch the flesh that is between the two liens of an intromissoire until the pus that is inside comes out, and remove the abscess; then treat the cure that has been inflicted, as long as the lien chient; then treat the cure of oignement that is appropriate for this, until it is healed; and if the abscess is in the belly of the vein, if you have pus on all the skin, then dip your hand in the pus from the abscess, and pull out the needle, and there should be a double thread, so that you can pull it from the other costeit; then tie the abscess as I have told you, or with the two ends of the thread of the one that is in the other part of the two needles; and if you doubt that the thread will not hold, then put another needle all the way through the pus at the incision of the first needle, and hold the threads in four leus; then cover the abscess until the excess is inside, then cover the superfluity of the cure and leave what is tied; then put a moist cloth on wounds and treat the cures of tents and oignemens until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses of the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Similarly, abscesses come in the artery and vein, abscesses also come to the nerves when they are cut, or from too much work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And this often happens to the helpers and the dose in all of them where there are joints, and this is very painful, and its color looks like the color of blood, and it is in many positions with pain; and when they strain it, if they feel the pain, and it is not from the body, but outside of the skin; and it moves from all parts, and does not go forward or backward, or outside or above, and those who are in joints do not need to cover them with iron: perhaps there is contraction; and those who are on the head or face, making the skin pale.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, if it has a point to a needle, and cut at its root; and if it is large, if it is suspended from the top, and scraped, then the bone and assemble the wound at the seam, and cure until it is healed.
des grosses boces pendans	of large tumors hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	Never found in bellies and never in any other part of the body, and it is a disease that is called "fungus" by its resemblance to mushrooms, and it has a subtle root, and large swellings; and there are small and very large ones; and I saw the man who had two or belly which were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had a thin root, and were growing due to moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I copied and found in one weighing eighteen ounces, and in the other six drams, and the work in the incision is that you look if the hairs are moist, and the color of the arrowhead is white and moist and of subtle root; if the copper has a wide spatula, and it is in your presence the fire cautery.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For in cutting, there often comes too great a flow of blood if you do not see the hairs, then hurry to cauterize; and if you see the hair spouting and painful from the incision of the iron, take good thread and tie the arrow as we have said, and let it be for two hours; and then restrain, and do not stop pulling the thread through until it covers the arrow, and cut through it with work; and if the roots are large, then use the copper itself for the belly, but you must also cover half of it, then cauterize that it does not return; then care for the wound, and guard that you do not cover the thread which is of pale color and poor sense and of milky appearance.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is some abscesses which become infected, and I will come to the treatment of wounds after this.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the foot is injured,
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the appearance of the foot injury comes from the wound or cut of the foot, and it is above the belly and in some of the swellings, as it has in other wounds, of blood which cuts veins or arteries according to what is before, or of pus; and if it is from the tear of the foot and from the outlet of the feces, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the blood, and it is a light thing without pain, and open from various outlets.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is for the purpose of the intestine, then it is most diverse, and when one presses it to its two sides so that it returns, and then it comes back, and perhaps if it is torn, and expands greatly at the entrance of the bath and for great labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is for moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand, do not constrain much; and if it is for an arrow, it is open by these signs of large and hard abscesses, and is filled according to a quantity; and if it is for windiness, it is soft to the touch, and the wounds are such that you look to see if it is for the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If you must leave, let them care for themselves.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For as I told you in the chapter of abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if the appearance is for the intestine or the abscess, then you must command the patient to dye his hair, and be extended straight out, then sign all around the belly; then place the infected part above the great umbilicus; then tie it tightly with a strong silk cord, and let the intestine hang down; if you find the intestine, take it out and hang it behind the stomach; and if you find the abscess, cut off the excess and put it in a container; and if the artery or vein makes you go against it, then quickly go around, then return to your work and take two needles, and put two threads through them, and make the patient hold them as if you were going to pierce; then strain the abscess into four parts above the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave the wound until it can heal, and let the dead tissue die by itself; or take it away when it has become thin and ready to fall off, then cure the wound as we have said; and strain out the pus or moisture that you find, then cure the wound as it should be, and suture the wound.
dou chancre	For the fire cauterization, instruct
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have spoken in the division about the similarities of chancre, and how one should treat it with medicines, and how to use iron cure; and we say that chancre should be treated with caution, and warned the ancient that when chancre is in a place where it can be removed as if it were a chancre that is in the breasts, and in the chest, and similar places, and one must remove everything when it is in the beginning; and when it is large and old, then it does not matter that you approach it, for I have never been able to heal any; and no one has ever cured any before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the operations, when it is in a place where it can be removed, as we have said, is that you remove once the evil of black bile; then cleanse if it has manifest repletion, then bathe the wound in good blood to perform the operation; then pour your ointments or chancre, and the hair from all parts, and the bone from all parts without leaving anything; and let the blood flow freely, and wipe well the wound with your hand or any thing, and if the flow of blood makes you contrary to the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize until the blood is stopped; then treat other treatments until it is healed.
de ydropisie	For hydropy, instruct the patient to let the h
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	In the division of hydropsy, we have mentioned the resemblances of hydropsy, and in what manner the assembly of the acute is made, and the signs of each resemblance, and the treatment by medicines, and that which is cured by iron: if it is only swelling; and one should not touch iron in these two resemblances: that is to say, tympanites and hyposarcoce, for it is a deadly thing; therefore when you treat this resemblance of hydropsy which is called "swelling" by medicines, and the cure does not work, if you look at whether the pain is weak, or if he has another disease besides hydropsy, as vomiting and similar things; then do not touch iron, for there is doubt; and if you see the pain of great virtue, and he has no other disease except hydropsy alone, and he is not too old nor too young, then thus: gently lift the pain upwards with your hands, and the assistant presses the belly by bringing the acute to the lowest part of the worst, then take the spatula in the form of a spoon:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And cutting of two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	And cutting of two parts at the tip, and ensure that no part is too thin so that it can reach the intestines when thrown, and cannot be bleached; then check if there is hydrops near the intestines: if it is for the disease of the liver, then make your incision on the right side of the third rib three fingers above the shoulder; and if it is for the gallbladder, then make it on the left side of the third rib three fingers above the shoulder, and it should not be that the hairs grow on the incision so that the superfluous do not run to the weak liver; then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and boil, and remove your hand from all the space between the skin and the gallbladder as if in scraping at the quantity of an angle or around; then pierce the gallbladder until the space comes to the desired length, and that is the two edges of the blade, then remove this instrument of which this is the form:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it is similar to a thin silver chain, and is of light rain or chalk, and has in its part below three small holes; and on one side, three holes; and two on the other side, and one on the other; and the one who sews it is cut as with a pen, and this is the shape of the incision that the scribes make to cut the pen:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	At the top of the above is the needle, so that when the instrument comes to the point, then it should be inserted now above the instrument; voiding the half or the third part, because if you remove more than it is necessary in that hour, by chance if the patient dies from the resolution of his spirit of the arm, or he faints, or approaches death; but according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the wound signify, and its pricks; then take the instrument and retain the point, and it is retained now for the one who strikes the hole that is above the syringe, of which I have spoken, that you pierce in this manner; then restart the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering from this, and take a small quantity of the point; do this every day, and guard against following it too much until it is only a little blood.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt the pain, and leave it for a long time, the cure of the sepulture or sand chafes, and by much sweat or bath and in the sun, and becomes tanned; and the cure of desiccative medicines as long as they are healthy, and cauterize above the stomach and above the liver and above the spleen after the extraction of the arrow, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the stopping of the rod
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	No child ever is born who does not have some pertuss in the rod, or the pertuss is small, or it is not in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is necessary to pierce very thinly throughout the entire length according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then place or pierce very thinly through the bottom, and bind it and keep it thus for three or four days until he wishes to urinate, then remove the closure, and let him urinate, and then put it back; and perhaps it does not suit, because the urine that comes out does not leave it closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	If the one who is pierced is small, then treat him with a thin piece of cloth from the bottom, as we have said, and it will expand.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who have not yet pierced in their own flesh are called "blecets," because no one is born with a piercing at the top of the penis, so they cannot urinate before their penis rises; and they cannot ejaculate because the matter cannot come to the marriage, and it is a very bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the manner of the work is such that the hairs lie evenly on their backs, with the head of the knife and the copper plate like the width of a quill, so that when the wound cuts in the middle, it is done as it should; and beware of letting blood flow too much, and if it does, if the water that comes out is blood, and treat the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	of the pus from the knife
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times worms come in the knife, and it is an appearance of a bad smell; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; if you must take them out with a delicate hook, and clean and remove all, then put on cotton moistened in Egyptian ointment; then treat the wound until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if it is a malignant ulcer, black and putrid, then you must apply cauterization.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have cleaned it, and if the ulcer is deep within the flesh and has spread to both sides, then you must first remove the part that is inside; and when it is healed, then treat the part on the outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you treat them together, if the ulcer is not healing, and it becomes blacker and more corrupted, and there is pus, then remove all that is black and corrupted, then apply a poultice of honey and flour made from grape scum and eggs, then treat with other treatments until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	If bleeding occurs, then apply the lunar cauterization according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cauterizer should aid in two dispositions: at the onset of bleeding and during corruption; and if the prick is corrupted and drawn back, it is necessary to apply a piece of cloth soaked in piss between the wounds; and when the flesh has reached the head of the rod that has not yet been circumcised, or if it is a wound or an abscess, then it is necessary to scorch it with the tool until the ligaments are loosened, and the prick is delivered from all parts of the rod; and if this is a difficult matter to decide, then it is necessary to scorch it with the tool at any point above the head of the rod and the skin; then thoroughly clean between them, and apply a subtle linen cloth soaked in cold water, so that it does not recur.
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not of the same importance as other wounds; nevertheless, when we perform this work of our will, and properly on children, it is necessary that we do the best work, and the lightest in terms of health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision of their children, because they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have seen the greatest part of the masters and sages who performed circumcision in the time of the ancients, and at forces, and all at once; since it was the most careful one because it had two threads, and perhaps if one coped with the other, it would delay the one outside.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or the recovery is prolonged, and the pain is doubled, and the mundication which is done with oil does not always ensure the point of the member; and the mundication of the wound by chance may escape the iron, and corrupt the work, and many times it happens that they are born in such a way that they have no need of mundication.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the mundication which is done with force to all the length of the thread, I have found the best of the experiment, for the forces cut as much from above as from below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you press your hand, it cuts equally in all the length of the thread; but that the thread be well stretched around the skin; and that the manner of the first work is such that you make the child think, if he listens, that you are only binding the thread around the rod as much as possible, and then throw it in all ways that you can; then bring the thread straight between your hands, and press the forces between your hands or outside your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then close your hand on the rod and blow gently, and take it up as high as the end of the rod is; then clean it well of the dirt which is gathered there, then tie the limb with a double thread, then tie it outside one end to the other end; and take the two ends to the second work at the pouch and the proper index, and cover between the two ends, then lift the gently and take the head of the rod; then let the blood flow little by little, for that is the most dangerous; and put powder on top and top the powder with a poultice made of a piece of bread cooked hastily with red wine vinegar, confit with rose oil and fresh, and leave it there until the other day, and cure the other cure until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the forces for the healing process is as follows: both shoulders should be held tight and stretched, and they should be kept equally as strong as the other.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error in the healing process is when the fingers are bent during the incision; therefore, it is necessary to extend them at your angle, as well as the other fingers, and if you cannot hold them at your angle, then use splints and then the coping.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they stay for three days, and what is outside the rod is swollen, let it remain until the abscesses have healed, and scrape lightly; and if you can move the coping as you please, and guard against the part of the rod, it will not harm him.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cure then the limb of things sordid wound from powder, that we have said or treat of powders, and if one copes with care beyond measure, and it goes above, so it will not harm; cure then, as we have said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	retaining of the urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The retention of the urine is by oppression of the stone, or of blood congealed, or of bowels, or of charred, or of similar things, that we have said in the division; and if the urine is not released, and you see the retention by the stone which is high or col of the bladder, then it is necessary that the pain be raised above his knees; and his feet are put on his back, and his belly is extended from the part above the back, and restrains the pain as much as he can; and therefore the bladder's neck is pressed against the stone above, for which reason the urine is released, and if it does not come, as we have said, and the pain is great, then you must administer extraction with all the instrument called «siringue», of which this is the form: and it is of fine silver, thinly beaten, like the quill of an owl; and it is of a palm length and half, and it is thin at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And the manner of the issue of urine is that you take a double thread, and tie it at the head of a linen or cotton cloth, and push the head of the thread into the tube; and cover the excess of the cloth and push it towards the head of the tube, then oil the tube with oil or butter and egg white, and make the patient sit on a chair, and the arise the urine and the stick of moist oil and oil of olive and vinegar; then place lightly the tube in the stick, until it reaches the root of the stick, then double the stick over towards the edge; then push the tube ahead just next to the cloth, and the patient feels the urine coming next to the empty thing, and this is not done according to this order except when the conductor or she goes is twisted; then stop the thread at every linen pocket and pocket, and the urine follows the cloth, then extract it, and correct the urine; and begin the tube until the bladder is empty and aligned with the patient.
des maladies de la vessie	of bladder diseases
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When skin or blood enters the bladder, or putrefaction and assembly occurs, and you see it distill water and medicines, then use any tool called «clepsedre», and its form is:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed, and has three holes: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and the threads are passed through it by which the medicine cuts so that it stops well the urethra, so that it can be drawn out the moisture, and put back when necessary; and when you see your medicines entering the bladder, put the head of the syringe in the moisture, and draw to the drawing which is outside; if you draw the moisture to the syringe, and then strongly close the drawing outside; the moisture will enter inside, and it will come to the bladder now, so that it can feel the pain; and this is the form of the subtle catheter with which one catheterizes the bladder: if it is in:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it is of silver or of lead, and is the highest of the joints; and it is removed from the shoulder where the tendons meet; then take a sheep bladder and put the moisture that you saw clustered in the bladder, then place it between the two breasts formed by a good piece of double woolen cloth, and heat the moisture above the fire; then pour the head of the clyster into the rod, then strain your hand on the bladder throughout the moisture, until the hairs feel that this moisture has come to the bladder; and if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle, and pierce it roundly around; then pull the string strongly in these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles a bag, and put inside what you saw of oil and moisture and vinegar, and tie it in the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have said in the division the methods of stone, and extraction together with remedies; and I have said the difference between the arrow embedded in rain, and all signs, and in which kind of stone one should open with a drill; and in the bladder, and in the staff; and I will tell you clearly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the arrow that is embedded in the bladder often occurs more frequently in children, and this is a sign that the sharp pain of the bladder, similar to sharpness in its subtlety; and it opens wounds, and greatly increases the pain of the staff, and can many times, and then rots; and from many of these jumps the foundations; and it is light for the healing of children up to they are four years old, and is very painful in adults, and is constantly present, to those who are between young and old; and it is the cure less heavy of those who have the arrow large, than of those who have the small.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, it is first necessary to cleanse the wound with a poultice, to draw out all the filth that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it never hinders one from seeking the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the wound by the feet, and stand up and move it away from the body, so that the stone descends to the edge of the intestines, and never once rises above the thigh; then place it between your hands and cleanse it, with your hands away from your thighs, so that the intestines are completely declining downwards; then take and touch it inside; if you feel the stone in the space, then hurry now to cut across the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	If she does not chase the touchier douce away, then prick your middle finger of your right hand, if the pain is sharp, or your ring finger, if the pain is dull; and place it in the base, and cut into the stone, and when you feel it at your finger, then moisten the end with urine; then press against your finger, and the stone will come out where you see it was cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the minister to press the urine into his hand, and command him to extend his right hand with the fingers in the air, and his left hand to remove the skin that is outside the fingers in the part where the incision is made; then cut the spatula, of which this is the shape:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And between the bones and the foundation, not in the middle but on the right side of the naval; and the blade should be straight above the stone, and the handle should be attached or at the base, and the belly should be wide by default, and narrow inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large; perhaps the pressure that is at the base, that it should jump out without effort; and if there are parts where the stone has angles, and edges: if it is rough to get out; and if there is a part that is smooth, similar to a glass, and rounded, from which the issue is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	When there are angles and margins in this place, make the incision larger; if it does not jump, then you must strain it with nails that are as thick as a lime at the head, to prevent the stone from escaping; or you can use a subtle hooked instrument at the head; and if you cannot engage it thus, enlarge the opening slightly, and if there is no decortication, then strain it with vitriol; and if there are more than one stone, first remove the largest at the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then extract the small ones afterwards.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, it should be made larger, and a larger wound should be made.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For two things happen to the wound: either it dies, or the urine comes out through the skin that the leeches cannot sew; but you must try to pull, or to tear with pincers, until you tear it into pieces; and when you have completed your work, apply enchantments of incense and aloe and dragon's blood to the wound, and bind it, and put a moist linen cloth on top, in oil and wine, or in oil and vinegar and cold vinegar, to soothe the boil; then re-sew the wound over its collar, and do not leave the thread until the next day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you reset it, rub the joint well with oil and vinegar, then apply a poultice of mustard plaster and basilicon until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if an abscess comes into the wound and corrosions, and clots of blood in the bladder, and it is retained by the urine, which is known to be held back without a leak with the urine: then put your hand on the wound, and extract that blood, because if it remains, it will rot the bladder, and it will poison; then lift the wound with vinegar and salt and baking soda, and help it in all ways that you can, until it is healed; and it is necessary that all the ointments that you cure it with, that you bind them to both thighs, and gather the medicines above the wound.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small, and it is conducted with a stick, and tied with a thread, and the urine cannot issue; then the cure for this that I have said before, that you should cut many times, is to excuse the cutting for this cure.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already experienced this.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take an iron rod according to this form and be at three angles tied with a thread:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take a thread and tie it around the rod outside the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then gently push the rod into the rod until it reaches the stone; and slowly turn the rod in your hand into the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from the other side; if urine comes out immediately, then press your hand above what remains of the stone that is inside the rod.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is currently broken, and has jumped with the urine, and is sharp to the limbs; and if you cannot do this for any reason, then remove the thread from the stone and the other from above, then make the rod in the place of the stone between the two pieces, then extract it forcefully, and remove the piece, and clean the clotted blood that is in the wound; and treat it until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	of the stone from women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	There is hardly ever a stone in women, and if there is ever one, it is a difficult cure, and is forbidden for three reasons: the first is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman well-trained who will expose herself to shame, specifically when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third way is that by chance one cannot find a woman well versed in this hand skill; and the fourth way is that if the woman's stone is further forward than the man's, because of which it is necessary to make a deeper incision, and there is great fear. And if necessary, she must be held down, and if you do not hold her down, do not do the operation; and present a wise woman well versed in women's affairs, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to do what you command for the examination of the stone; and look very carefully whether the woman is a virgin: therefore, it is necessary to put her on her back and ask for the stone; and if she finds it, she must push it out of her body, and recommend that she lie on her back and press her right hand against her bladder firmly.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she finds it, it is necessary to move it greatly from the entrance of the anus until it reaches the root of the thigh; then cut into the bone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the bone where it is musky and stained, and feel the arrow in that part; and do not move the other side above or below, and let the wound be small at first; then stop the bleeding by sewing in the belly, if you feel the arrow so sharp that the wound cannot be closed until the arrow can be removed, and know that there are many kinds of arrows: namely, small and large, sharp and blunt, long and round, and those with rain.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	If you have similar cases to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if you cannot see it, put the broken glass in your eye for an hour until the pain is gone; then return to your work, as long as the stone is not completely removed, and have the instruments that I have told you about in the extraction of the stone for men to help you in your work; if you cannot see it, and it is the artery that is cut, put powder on the eye and bandage it with tents and cotton, and do not start again, and leave the stone and do not pull it out, because it might kill the patient; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	When the heat of the blood is calmed, and the wound has healed, then return to your work until the stone is formed.
de hernie carnouse	For hernia, cause of cancer.
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Watery ramice is nothing other than the assembly of moisture or white sweat, which is outside the belly's curtain that contains the urine; and it is called «syfac», and never is properly in the web of the urine, if one wishes that it is another urine; and this is the skin of the belly between the white sweat that we have said; and it has no other.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the growth of this branch is due to its weakness that comes from the roots, and it is spread by that matter.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And sometimes it comes from percussion on the roots, and this moisture has many colors: it is a declining color to yellow, or no red, or black, or watery white, and there are more; and these are the signs of knowing this assembly, because if it is white and soft as we have said, it is the abscesses that we have said, it is short like the figure of an egg, and does not open the roots, because it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if it has moisture in its own skin, it is the abscesses that we have said with a part of the egg, and because of this people think it is another egg; and if the moisture is between the skin of the roots and the white softness, it feels good; therefore when you see the color of the moisture, try all the surrounding parts, for which form it has previously.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes after the introducer, judge what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we cure it with iron, it is necessary to clean the hairs according to as much power and the replenishment of its body; then place it on its back, on something a bit high, and cover it with much cloths; then bend over its left side, and command the minister to bend over its right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs near the kidneys; then take the spatula and scrape the skin of the kidneys from the long one to above the knuckle, and make your incision straight in cutting the skin of the kidneys towards the white face, and scrape the subtle back according to as much power; then pierce the white plain with sharp and wide strokes, and extract all the sharpness, and then put your forceps, and close the white face above; and do not touch the kidneys except the white face itself; cover all or by pieces carefully the side of it subtly, that if you do not cover it well, it will return to the sharpness; and if the wound opens up in your work, then reset it in its place when you have completed the work of the white face; then gather the two flaps of the kidneys at one seam, then cure it as the other wounds, until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you have to remove the corrupted flesh due to another disease, it is necessary to tie the vessels that are suspended, doubting the flow of blood; then cover the wound with a suspended cloth, and remove the flesh, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the bone is assembled in two parts together, as it is two branches; then cover the other part as you have done the first equally, then wipe the blood, and put some ground mullen in rose oil into the wound; and put another layer of ground mullen in wine and oil on top, and place two bandages over the two dressings, and tie it all together with a cloth according to this form.
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two cloths and place them according to this likeness and be assembled by sewing in the neck of the undergarments, and one of the patient's arms over the foundation just above the back, and the other to the part of the wrist; and the other head above the two angles, and all together the restriction in the loop of the undergarment; and once this branch of the cautery is medicated in the shape of an iron tail, and it is that you take one cauterizing needle fine, and apply it to the skin of the wounds, and be heated as we have said, so that the white sap that contains the poison is revealed; then take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that sap with small incisions, and the scab with this subtle cauterizing:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And in all ways that you can, until you have extracted everything; and be careful that the knife does not touch the bone; and cleanse this work so that it is safer; and guard against bleeding, and avoid doing harm to the patient; and if anything goes wrong, such as an abscess or bleeding or other thing, treat it according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the pain is not severe, and does not want to endure this work due to its horror, then use perforation as I have told you; and when you are certain that water is the cause, sit the pain on a raised seat; then pierce the abscess in the part away from everything, and put the perforation through the length of the body; and let the wounds be wide so that all the sharp edges flow out; then put cotton on the wound and tie it, and leave it to drain the remaining sharp edge; then treat the wound until the wound is healed; and if the white cloth does not allow the sharp edge to escape from the wound mouth, then you must use a pen or the instrument that treats the sharp edges of hydropikes, as its form is as before; and enlarge the wound, and let the sharp edge return, and it will be assembled after six months or within a year, and when it is assembled as before, and so on, the pain will pass its days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of abscesses of the ears
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	In the section of this branch, there are many positions that cause fear in many people, which seems to me to be better left alone; and I will tell you about the work and similar things of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say therefore that many abscesses come from wounds, and also from the ears; and it is often the case.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	It is to know by excessive sharp and wet, which is spread in the ears, or from percussion; and the color of the abscess is according to the color of the blood; and it does not have pain, and it is a grievous abscess; and perhaps some grayish, purulent, and yellowish abscesses, and of no color, and sometimes comes from a new out of an artery, or from inflammation of the vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is from the artery, then it is known by the position of the abscess being high, when you press it with your fingers; and you should not touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	Those who are made of opening a vein are known by their position at the expression of gentle touching with your fingers, and can often make the cut above this similarity, and above others; and you should cover the wound with the curd of milk, then raise the wound up, and pull out the thread from the white surface, and deliver the suspended part of all parts of the wound.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the wound is already sewn with these threads, then it is necessary that you cut the wound, and cover; and if it is in the surface, or inside the vessels, then it is necessary that you deliver all of that which is held, and cover it roundly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the hair at birth is on the back of the head, it is necessary that you shave it all, and straighten the forehead, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is done, apply the wound with a soft cloth soaked in rose oil and wine, then apply other treatments until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is a type of abscess enclosed in an envelope resembling a blister, with the softening of the testicles, and the pain is great when moving; and the treatment of this disease is just as difficult and dangerous as the previous one, and we will tell you about its work, according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	It is necessary to make the dislocated joint sit on its own seat, then lift the suspensory ligament of the tendons down to your fingers, and the ones close to the thigh, and tie them with the master knots, and extend them evenly; then cut the tendon with a wide blade at the cross point, until they are uncovered, and then scrape off all the parts, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in temples; then take an needle or doubled thread, and tie it to the first limb where the blood came from, and tie it to the other end; then cut them in the middle straightly, according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupted moisture; then cure the wound as we have said for others, so that no tendon is torn; because there is no harm, and if all the tendons come out, it is necessary to draw the tendons to all the tendons; so that he does not lose his grip through the incision of the tendons, and they dry and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	of the toothache
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The causes of this branch are due to the section that comes out from the toothache, or the extension upwards on the belly in the part of the angles, because the intestines descend from that toothache to one of the coions; and this toothache is either from the section of it, or from the extension of it, and these two methods of many causes: from impact, or jumping, or shouting, or lifting heavy weight, and similar things; and the signs when it is the extension of the toothache, it is that it has little and little, in long tension, and does not come suddenly; and it is the abscesses equal up to the front, because the toothache approaches the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs of the cutting of the tongue are that it brings on sudden pain at the beginning, and there are various appearances of abscesses outside the skin, and it is for the end of the intestine and the heart because of the cutting of the tongue.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the worms are found with the intestines, and they are retained inside, and cause great pain to suffer from the misalignment, especially when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these cures of iron with fear, because it should be avoided.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And the method of the work is that you command or misalign the intestine with your hand inside the wound, if it can be pulled back; then place the neck above and between your hands, and relieve the ribs; then place the key above, and cover all the skin of the incision with oil; then insert a finger in the lips of the belly according to what you have skill for opening the wound, and make sure that the two fingers do not come out; then scrape the tongue that is outside the skin of the incision, until the white tongue is completely exposed from all parts; then insert your index finger in the direction of the incision, between the white tongue that is outside the skin of the belly, and between the second tongue, and behind the belly, and between the second tongue; and move it gently with your right hand inside the skin of the incision, and place the white tongue in your left hand above, and relieve the belly over the white tongue; and command the minister to extend the belly upwards, and remove what is behind the flap; and if you find anything, bring it out of the stomach; then take a needle or a thread made of twelve threads of wool, and insert it in the back part of the tongue, which is after the skin of the incision; then cover the threads with oil, and tie them together in the shape of a cross, and bind the tongue, which we have said is outside the skin of the incision, with a strong thread of two parts; then cover the threads with oil, and tie them together in the form of two parts, so that none of the wool that grows can enter the wounds, that an abscess does not form; and finally place the first thread according to the first thread, and leave the tongue which is outside the skin of the incision as large as a finger; and then the other according to the roundness that the belly carries; then cover the part that is outside the skin of the incision, both without correction and with correction, and the bowels, as we have said before; then apply soft oil to the wounds, and apply the thread that we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And never cauterize the white, pus-filled wound that we have said, after incision, due to doubt of bleeding.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this has often happened, and let the arrow remain until it falls out of him; and if it takes too long to fall, then be sprinkled with hot vinegar, and put on what we have said, until it falls; then treat the wound with other treatment, until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia carbuncle
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch, I have never seen anyone dare to make the cure by iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients said that it is made as the branch that is together with the viscera, in a similar way that you tie the vessels, after the tail lightly but firmly; then cover in, and treat the abscess of what works, until the vessels rot; and the treatment is as we have said, until it is perfectly healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Never comes a rip or tear, as we have said, and open the wounds; and let no one touch the intestines with their fingers, and if they do, it is little, and repair every hour; and in any case, if it remains too long in this point, the pain or swelling increases, as we have said, because the intestines are stretched, then soften and inflate the wounds and open them; and the cure is by cauterization, as we have already said; and never is the cure done in this way: and it is that the wounds are squeezed on their back between your hands, then cover the wound of the tear with a large cloth according to the quantity of three fingers; and then remove the intestines that are outside the skin that covers them, then take the rag and place it on the wound of the tear; and press against the front of the belly, then cut the two wounds that appear from the tear above the head of the rag, and cut both; then remove the head of the rag, and do not cover the intestines or stretch them or do anything else, as I have told you in the cure of the intestines; then cure by the treatment of wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you remove the splinters, uncover and heal the wound until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The splinter is hidden, and does not appear in the rent, and the cauteries are dull in this limb, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of leather from harnesses
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the leather of harnesses is softened in some people, because the chariots that are inside are mollified, and it can be seen; and when one wants to cure it, it is necessary to let the wound lie on its back, and to remove the softened leather from the natural leather; then bring together the two lips at a seam, and if you see that there is too much softened leather, cut it off at three or four seams tightly; then sew between the seams, and cure as with other wounds until it is healed, and cut the thread.
dou chastrement	for gently
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	It is customary in our law to speak gently, and because I wish not to speak of it in this book; and there are only two reasons for it: one is that the patient should respond gently when asked, and be treated gently; and the other is because we often have dealings with gently treating some animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and rabbits and others.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say therefore that gently is done in two ways: by attraction or by cutting.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In that which we do by attraction, we place the animal in hot water, until the hooves are softened and warm; then we take them in our hand, until they are returned and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	For the treatment of the tail: it is necessary to burn the beast, and press the skin of the intestines with your right hand, then tie the suspensory ligament, and scrape over each vein at the top, when you have well burned them; and leave no trace of the superficial and subtle veins that are on the vessels; and this method of cauterization is better than that made by attraction, because by attraction something of the intestines may remain, by which the beast desires luxury; then cure the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	des hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermaphrodite is according to the two ways that men are: one is that between the two testicles open as wide as the figure of a woman's nature, with hair, and sometimes cutting the urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other way is in women, and has a penis like a finger and two testicles.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the care of men and women is that you remove all the ingrown hairs and treat them as other wounds; in the second way, of men whose urine springs from the skin of the testicles, there is no treatment.
de la tentigene	of the incision
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	A tentigen is a charred piece of wood placed on the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see; and some women have had it as big as a hand, and that is the cure.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is necessary that you clean the excess of the tentigen on your hand or in a basin, and wipe it lightly; and do not alter too much, because blood does not come, then the cure of other cures until it is healthy; and to another char that is born at the mouth of the marsh, and use it, and by chance it jumps out, and it is according to the appearance of a cow, and for this they called the old «cow disease».
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If it is necessary to treat it, as we have said about the treatment, and care for it until it is healed.
de erratique	of erratic
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	Erratic is when the nature of woman is not well perceived, or the perturbation is small; and it is natural by birth, or accidental by disease that has come to her; or it is caused by charms, or subtle or sharp sorcery, and it is made from within the marriage, or in the cost, or outside, or whatever it may be; and it prevents conception, and pregnancy, and possibly the flowers to have; and the knowledge of this is by the look of the body.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the swelling appears to be nearby, then it is either yours or his.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is a subtle facial swelling, and it is near the two lips, then hurry, and do as follows: bring your two index fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread; then form the two lips into a tube, until the subtle facial swelling is drawn out, and is over the swelling; then take linen, and dip it in oil, and place it on the limb, and massage the woman every day, so that she cannot sleep.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the facial swelling is hard and rough, then it is necessary to apply a poultice like a leaf of mint.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the wound is from a horse's kick, lift it up and cover it with a cloth; and have remedies to staunch blood, such as acacia, bloodroot, incense, and an abundance of wheat flour; then apply a large piece of dry plaster, so that the wound does not suppurate; and thus let it remain, and cover it with a linen tent; then treat other remedies until it is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when in the marsh comes a horse's kick, cover it according to this method, unless it is an infected abscess.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For the infected abscess in the marsh, one should not touch it with fire.
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that do not usually bleed, and when hemorrhoids become old they become thelul; and we have had said in the division the similarities of these, and the signs, and I will say here those that require treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and thelul, when they are formed in the marsh, and do not appear until felt, if not treated with iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those that can be felt at the edge of the marsh, are those that can be treated.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	Therefore, you should put the woman in a cold house, then the thelul with pincers, and the copper in its roots, then powder over medicines restraining blood, such as acacia and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then boil her feet for an hour, then put her in very cold water; and if there is discharge of blood, sit in a decoction of sumac and the skin of green pomegranates and gall and similar things, and then take wheat flour, and mix with honey and egg, and make the poultice on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	If he is strong, it is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If not, make him lean back and apply suction cups to his back and breasts without injuring; then take the limb, and soak it in plantain juice or agrimony juice with old wine, and apply suction to the joint.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess is ready to burst, treat the limb with poultices until it is healed; and the one called "albathir" is red, and resembles a sharp chief, if it needs covering as I have said the thulium; and then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	of abscesses in the marsh
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many types of abscesses come in the marsh, such as chancre and pustular abscess and herpes and estiomenes and fistulas and hemorrhoids and chaut abscess, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	It is therefore necessary to say in this treatment of the chaut abscess that comes in the marsh, which is not one of the abscesses that collide; and if you know how to use iron, look at the abscess if it is agus at the beginning of its appearance, and plain of heat and fever, and if it becomes red, see if you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Therefore do not rush to pierce, but make him breathe so long as the pain is eased; and then place the painful part on a seat, and have two small seats where he leans, and rests on his back, and gathers his feet to the sides of the leg; and let his knees be spread, and put his arms outside his hips, and tie them well with a good belt; then apply the bandage towards the right side, and have the instrument ready that is used to open the mouth of the wound, from which afterwards comes the form; and it is necessary that when you see the instrument being applied, that you first feel the depth of the wound, so that what enters into the instrument does not go further than it should, and that it does not harm the painful part; and if the instrument is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the wound with cloths, so that the instrument does not hurt it; and it is necessary that he put the horn of the instrument above, and stain the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	When abscesses are open and they are squeezed out by hand, it should be covered with the head's chief, the spatula leath; and when the wound is empty, it should be put into the wound moistened tents in rose oil or green dry oil; and the tent far from the wound to the edge of the marsh, and above the marsh and above the other clean moistened gauze in hot water or boiled vinegar soaked; then after II hours of poulticing, as long as it is healed; and never lift the marsh and the wound by a poultice of hot water and honey, and then of hot water or roots of lily and aristolochia boiled.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is sutured with a marl, it is necessary to be careful not to use iron, but to cure it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	The midwife is first to the birth that she knows the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs when you see the woman approaching, and wants to smell the ar: then the child quickly issues; therefore wash that child according to the natural figure, and it is its issue with its head, and the second with him; and when you see these signs, if you should gently press his belly, so that the child comes out soon; for when it comes down on its head, and the second is with him, and it is washed with the marl of its superfluities by good cleansing; and this that comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	Because it never comes up from its feet, and comes out of the back or shoulder, and hands, or comes up over its belly, or sometimes, and is turned over its collar, and by other bad figures; so it is necessary for the bailiff to be wise and subtle in these things, and if he makes a mistake and is deceived, I will show you all the figures how one should help.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes out of its head naturally, and the mother gives birth painfully, and her strength is weak, then let the midwife sit on a seat, or let women hold her; and rub oil or fenugreek that has been cooked onto her back, and then give the bailiff a small spatula of this form:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	and pierce the second joint, and cover its angle as much as possible; and take the woman's belly so that the fetus descends, and if it does not, then you must clyster the woman with musk fenugreek powder with sesame oil; then let her swallow and spit out the mixture for an hour: then the fetus will now descend.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if both hands are dislocated, then you must gently and gradually reset them; and if they cannot enter, then place the woman on a chair, and lift her legs up high; then remove the chair from the ground, and bend over the woman, so that she does not faint at the rising; and if the hands still cannot enter, and the child is dead, then cover the hands with cloth that was previously placed on the belly, and extract the child, and reset it gently.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	from the child's birth above its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes above its feet, it should be placed on its back; then gently turn it little by little until it is even; then grasp both feet and extend them gently.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If it jumps up from the cradle, command it to lie down, and let it spit out its contents; if it jumps again, then God willing.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not lie down as we have said, gently turn it little by little until it is in the natural position.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	Then it will be perfectly fine.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if it does not come out as we have said, take a muscle sample from a high-quality, and oil of wormwood, and melted lead, and grind everything in a mortar; and put on the natural form of the woman inside and outside this ointment, then make her sit upright until above the ribs; and when she is softened out, make her a mirepoix, and put it out, and let her rest for an hour; then make her sit on the seat, then make her vomit and hold her mouth and nose, and lightly press her belly, for the child now jumps.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	of the child's head above its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this form, place your hands gently and gently; then lean it on its neck, and hang its feet down, and lie it on the bed; then gently fold its hands, and grasp its arms from behind, until it is fully dressed below; and if the child does not cry, take its feet and move them gently, then move the stomach upwards, then push your hands; and gradually feed the child little by little; and command the woman to hold it until the child is born.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the issue of the child who comes out widely with a hand extended
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	It is necessary to bring back the hand: if one cannot bring it back, then lift the woman and go; if she cannot go, then make her lie on the bed, and bend her legs; then apply the muscle relaxation that I have mentioned; and if she does not give birth, then make her sit on the chair, then study how to bring back the hand; and when the child is born, place it according to its natural shape, and make it sneeze, and command that it be pinched until the baby comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	of the child's neck, and have his hands spread out, and his face turned towards his mother's back
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	it is necessary that the midwife wash his hand, then turn it slowly and gently; when it is aligned, place the muscle-like substance of butter and oil on it, as we have said, then command her to move it slowly; when you have done this, place it on a chair, and command her to sit; and make him spit
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in the same way for all the second joints
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	when he comes to do this for all the second joints, hold the second joint against your finger, until the moisture is removed; and if the child cries out from his face and neck, hold it against its back, so that it is not retained, and the child dies; then give the child inside, until you have placed it as it should be, and command the woman to sit only once: then it is gently released
de l’issue des gemelz	of the issue of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	It is not uncommon for twins to be born many times, and sometimes three or four at a time; and this is not an unusual thing, and it happens often.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	It is strange that they do not live, if not for the cord that ties them together, which is attached to the belly; and sometimes they are born as naturally as one at a time, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they are born forcefully, as we have said the care should be, and if the afterbirth is subtle, and she does what it does quickly and lightly, then do so as it is good for her health.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Never formed in the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, or seventh month, and are all formed into the shape of a child by the measurement of the wise one, and it is best that the baby swallow everything, because by chance similar things happen to them; so do as it should be.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When treating the woman of the dead child or womb, as I have said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are forced to use manuals; if the woman is of sound virtue and has no accident or fear of death; then it is best that she lie on her back, and her arms are inclined downwards, and her legs raised; and the minister gives two parts of tansy, or she is left lying in bed if she is not treated for the descent of the child; then rub the mouth of the woman with moist cloths with mustard and fenugreek and seed of lin, then put her hands in these oils and mustards; then give her lightly, then let her drink whatever is convenient to her, and if the child is born take care that it descends above its head; if it is born with its eyes open put it in her arms or on her chest or in her mouth or in some palace or behind the beard or under the chin or in the middle of the ribs; and if it is born with its eyes closed put it in her arms or on her shoulder or in the middle of the ribs; and it is best that she ties the umbilical cord to her right hand, and puts the cauterizer between her left hand fingers, and gives a light blow to all her hand, and puts the umbilical cord in any of these places that we have said, until it comes to the empty thing; and this is the form of the umbilical cord:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then place the other finger against it, where you have the skill, so that the extraction is even; and then move it back and forth, to make it come out, and hold the teeth together, as it is in this form.
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if any part remains, then use one of its two fingers, and push it into that part, and remove the other part; and if none remains, then place this finger or a higher one on the joint, and do this until it all comes out.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be brought back by pressure, then you must wrap it over the injured part, until it all comes out; then place it in the joint of the foot or at the heel, and so you must do in the other hand, and on both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the question is about a child who is large and has a sharp point at the end, it is necessary to drive the spinal process between your fingers and make the head and extract the sharpness; or you break it with the tool called «almidach», from which the form comes with the tools or chapter that follows this one; and thus the same is done for a child with a great natural head; and then pull out the bones with pliers, and if the question is about a child who jumps up and down, hold him tightly to the forceps, if they are broken, until the blood issues forth; and if it cannot issue, cover it with pieces of cloth that you can; and if it is inflated in the belly or outside the ribs, it is necessary to pierce it so that the blood flows.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	If it is above its feet, then it is light attraction, and the direction to the mouth of the marsh is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if it is stiff in the abdomen or the groin, it is advisable to extract it with a cloth wrapped around your hand; and when the abdomen or groin, as long as the moisture that is there; and if the other member is broken, and the patient remains, then lift the hand from the marsh, and drag it to the mouth of the marsh; then pull out one or two, and remove it; and if the mouth of the marsh is retracted due to an abscess that has come, it does not matter to struggle, but it is advisable to administer moist and greasy things; and the medicines are plasters, and they are in high softening and moisturizing and greasing.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the infant is on its side, and you can put it back in place, as we have mentioned in the living child; and if you cannot do so, then break the limb into pieces, and leave nothing of the second part.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And once you have done that, as we have mentioned in the abscess chapter; and if blood comes out, it should be strictly bandaged, and other treatments applied.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	I saw a woman in whose womb an infant had died, then consulted the other with regard to that one, and it also died.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, some abscesses appeared in the groin, and they swelled so much that they burst, and then began to cause great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I went to the doctor, and he thought for a long time, and could not close the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied strong adhesive, and it pulled out some bones, and after some time, others came out.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was very surprised because the belly does not have bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I looked at the wound, and in it were many bones, until the woman was much better; and she saw the woman thus for a long time, and it was stuck with a little blood from the body; and I had not remembered this chapter before because when masters find an unusual thing, they do not know how to help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	bring the marble back to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	Here comes the form of pressure, with which we open the books; and to the second returns to the second questions of the two joints.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	All the same, the corners should be more subtle than the restraint, and made of flat or boxwood; and the mouth of the fust should be two fingers wide, and the margin of the trees should be one palm and a half; and in the two limbs should be two adjustments of this same fist, which should be firm in one and the other, half a palm long or a little more; and these two adjustments are inserted into the mouth of the marble when returning the two corners.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, should be made of flat iron or boxwood, according to the appearance of needles; and it should have two prongs, as you see, one palm long, and two wide; and when you want to open the wound all at once with the instrument, place the woman on the bed, her feet together and her legs spread, then push the two prongs together into the wound, and hold the head of the instrument between her breasts; then work your hand with the instrument equally, according to the quantity you want to open the mouth of the wound, until the bone does what it wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	This tool is surrounded by many similar ones; and when the one you have matched is ready, the work is faster, and higher in quality for its quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not disregard the tool that you have not matched, for its need is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the second one is held in childbirth, it is necessary to command the patient to hold his tongue, and then let him spit out the conditions, and hold your hands to his mouth and nose; and if he sneezes through it, well done.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If not, take the pot, and make a sneeze or covering, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the marsh, such as wormwood, anise, chamomile, cassia, and centaury; all these herbs, or some of them, should be boiled or potent over the fire; then put a spoonful or sneeze of pot in the mouth of the marsh, and the other chief in the mouth of the marsh, and let it steam until the vapors come into the mouth; then make him spit, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the patient sneezes repeatedly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if she remains after this treatment and is not better, command the midwife to moisten her right hand with sesame oil or mustard plaster, and then rub it into the skin, and repeat the second treatment; when she finds it, grasp and stretch it gently and straight, so that the husband does not prevent its extraction; but move it slightly to the right and left, and then remove it; it will come out and disappear.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the mouth of the womb is too narrow, we have said the cure of vomiting and fumigation of herbs; and if she is not of all that we have said, keep in mind that you do not force to draw; but it is good that what is at the mouth of the womb, you tie to the belly of the woman, then counteract with tetrefarmon ointment; if it will pass and be returned, and she will be well; but anyway, when she passes if there comes bad odor to the stomach and head, and bleeds the pain.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	If it is necessary, then apply contraversial fumes to the head: none of the ancients have experienced the fume of willow and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument used to fume the woman during retention of flowers and the secondine is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it is like glass in shape, and one places the head subtly into the nature, and the others wide over the fire; and let the fumes be over the charcoal, and the tine until it is wasted, and begin another.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born who have not pierced the foundation, but it has been stopped by some subtle sphincter: therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to pierce that sphincter at its proper place, and not to pierce any space agut, and to cover the location so that it does not touch; then put on a moistened cloth with wine and oil, then the treatment of the wound until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not set, place or press a splint on it, and let it remain for some time, and it should be strengthened as the child wishes to go into rooms.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And never comes this swelling of a wound or an abscess; if it covers the wound: if it is treated, as we have said of the splint.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula from the base
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that come from the base are nodulation, and thicker than those that come above the base, or in the space between the two parts, if there is one fistula or more; and when that nodulation is old, it works, and contracts moisture to become white or subtle bone, and never are these fistulas permanent; and they are known by the fact that there is egestion or ventosities when the pain makes egestion, and perhaps some verses.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that perforate the bladder, and perforate the middle of the penis; and they reach the joint of the hip, and perforate out of the buttocks.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus one knows the fistula passing through the basement, and not passing: and it is that you make your two fingers or basement, and put a thin needle of silver or iron into the fistula when there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if it has twisting, if you put a thin tent of cloth, or horsehair, until you feel the tent or the hair at your finger; and if you do not feel it, and there is no perforation, egestion, or windiness, as we have said: cut so that it does not perforate more; then hurry to cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is persistent near the bladder or near a urine conduit, if it allows urine to pass, and cannot be healed by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is perforated near the joint of the knee, and the tendon is close to the bone; if there is no twisting and the location of the pain is not clear, then it is likely that it is attached, and there is no cure by medicine or lancing; and in these persistent fistulas, there is no other cure than labor, and the vanity of those who meddle with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In the one that is not persistent and not ancient, in the hope of healing by fire, as I have experienced, and it is that the pain is hidden between your hands on its back; and the legs are raised up to its knees, and its knees are bent towards its belly; then place a tin or lead plate, if there is twisting, until you remove the tent.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the pain is felt around the base, then you must apply your two fingers, so that it seems to have pierced the sac; and if you feel between your thumb and index finger, then cut it out; since there is no other way to heal it.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	One can indeed heal some, but this rarely happens; and the aid that is made, is to heat the fine cauterizer according to the width of the fistula, as it has been said before; and push everything out through the fistula, until it reaches beyond the base; and do this two or three times, until you see that these shreds are removed, which are similar to a barbed arrowhead; then treat the wound with moistened burdock, as long as those shreds are removed, then treat the wound with ointment and bandage.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If it is thus healthy, it is well.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If otherwise, nothing else can be healthy; and if it is between two, and does not pierce just at the base where it is founded, and between your thumb and the tent there is a thick covering of char or syfac, and you see the fistula pointing towards the covering of the cure; if the copper of the beginning of the fistula, and before the tent, and then the cauterize after, until it comes to the top of the tent; and it will be delivered from the tent, and closed; then cleanse those char that seem like a quill of an eagle, and none remain.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if you cannot pull it out, and cut between you and the work, then cauterize with fire or medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For the fire cauterization does two things: it burns away the charred flesh and stops the bleeding of blood and removes moisture; then cure tents made of butter or of bruised herbs until the wound is healed, and the charred flesh is drawn out into the wound; then cure the wound with dry ointments made of hard charcoal, and these are the dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is healed, it is healthy and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if the fistula comes from just above the foundation, and is distant from the body, then press on the top or foundation, and ask what it is.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the tent, and there is thread or sutures or charcoal where it is about to pierce, if there are no other means but hope and faith, by the administration of one of the three methods: either cauterize it as we have said, or cut it just above the foundation, or if you can put tents and cure it as we have said; do not move too much in front, so that you do not cover the foundation that holds the base, and bring the egestions through the way you want; then cure it as we have said; perhaps it will be healed, or remove that covering and uncover it when it is cut below the foundation, or by tent or other instrument appointed; then clean the char that is in the wound, as much as you can; then study to restore the wound and to keep the fistula in the part before the foundation: if there is a lighter thing to the pain.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And often, fistulas are made in this way: and when you insert the probe into the fistula, it is where it is connected to the base of the skin on top of the flesh, so take a probe perforated at the tip according to this form:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And you push the wire through it, and push the probe along the entire length of the wire into the fistula until it reaches the top.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is not found at the edge of the base inside, then push the wire from that perforated one, so you push your other end to the bottom; and take the top of the wire, and put together the two prongs together, and hold them against each other, and leave it there for a while, until the thread covers those charred parts that are between the two, and heal; then cure the wound until it is closed and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not perforate, then try to puncture it in all possible ways that you can, unless it is too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it does not matter to make the sutures so deep if it is too deep, and then treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The form of the spinous spur that is made for the fistula is very sharp and pointed; on one side it is sharp and cutting; and on the other part, not, because we do not know what we should not do, as you see there.
des emorroydes	from the worms
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Worms are in two ways: either they are within the foundation, like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and some have blood inside them, and some have a little or a lot of blood, and some have no blood at all, and some have blood in their roots. The treatment of those that are within the foundation is that you command the patient to urinate in other rooms until the foundation is clean, and then you remove them with tweezers, or with your fingernail, then you cut off their roots; if they cannot be held by their moisture, take them with a needle, or cotton, or a piece of cloth; then stretch them out, then cut them off, and powder over some hot powders that are in the cauterizing chapter, or cauterize them as it is said, or in the cauterizing chapter, and treat them with other treatments until they are healed; and if the foundation cannot come out, then clean the wound with a sharp and rough clyster to remove what is inside the foundation, so that it can come out openly; and if the wounds are closed, and the filaments are strong from the foundation, then the treatment is light; and it is that you hold them with your fingernail or with tweezers, then cut them off, then treat them as we have said, until they are healed, and do not make an incision with a knife.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary to suture the wound according to this method: take a thread of twisted wool, and tie it into a needle, then pull the thread upwards and pierce the needle from the other side, and bring the two ends of the thread out on either side of the needle, and make it wide; and straighten the thread evenly, then untie the thread, and remove the needle, and do so with all the others, and leave one to let the excess blood out; then put under the wound a cloth moistened in rose oil or in cerote, and put under the wound, and command the patient to rest; and then let him rest until they heal, and when they are healed, cure them with ointment and other cures, until they are healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	drily with the hands where the base is founded
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	often found dry where the intestines are, and due to constriction of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary to shave at the point of a scalpel or with your fingernail above, which does not let it moisten; then treat it as it should be while it is dry; and if it cannot be dried, then start the shaving stronger than before, until it is fully healed, and then shave; then treat it as it should be while it is healed.
dou fremit	high fever
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Mouse is a small appearance deformed at the chest, and it goes up a lot in front; and sometimes the true one finds the frost, and the smell is like that of death from fever, and it comes to all the body, and more than any other part.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the cure is that you take a quill from a goose, or a pen of vulture very strong, and put that quill on the fever, as long as the circle surrounds the fever all around; then turn your hand to the whole quill until you cover all around the fever, and put it in front, and extract the fever from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, do this in the form of a rain or iron dog according to this shape, and be subtlely removed and drawn upwards:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	do not make a mistake, to hold it in the two places and press it; and if you see, cauterize the pain, as it is before or in the chapter of cauterization.
de la forme dou clistere	of the shape of the splint
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Never make a splint of silver or bronze, or iron melted or woven; and never make one of these small and large instruments according to those with which they are equipped.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those who are to be nursed in the care of children and those who are weak and painful, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the bandage is small and large, depending on how wide the belly is tied in this way:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And if there is a deficiency where the belly is tied, as you see, and the cloth is inside perforated; and at one side it has two holes, and at the other one; and the belly or put medicines from a beast's bladder or parchment, and it is perforated all around with small holes, and there is between each hole one inch of space, then sew in these holes with strong thread twisted in X or around, and gather the belly as if it were a goat; and when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument before a strong thread, then bandage; and this is the form of a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and oil the head of the poultice with oil or honey or something similar, then press it lightly; then the nurse gives it to the patient's two hands together, until it is all soft, then remove the poultice, and relieves the pain in his legs at once, and if the medicine wants to come out, let it come out as much as possible; and if he sleeps a whole night, it is greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you apply the poultice in the illness of diarrhea, and the medicine wants to come out, start it again as long as it is healthy.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if they are morbidly swollen at the base, or in an abscess, then the poultice should be as delicate as for a child; and this is the form of the delicate poultice with which the skin is stretched:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already mentioned the treatment of wounds in the division; now we will tell you about the treatments for hands and medicine according to completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are different according to what they are made of, and according to the parts or wounds that are made, and from which they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things that cause wounds are made from the sharpness of a spear, and the size of a sword or a dagger, or a lance or a staff or a sieve, or similar things; or they are made according to the length of the body, such as a wound that pierces through the neck, or the head, or the foot, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members; and I will tell you the cure for each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, because its chapter is remembered.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	When a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, be careful if it is from sharpness or similar things, and the skin is completely torn and the wound is large, and you doubt the development of an abscess: if you bandage it immediately from the cephalic itself if it comes soon with blood from the wound, and the bandaging should be on the opposite side of the injured part; and avoid the painful repletion of wine and heavy food.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the patient does not want to be treated, if he refuses, then his meat should be weakened, and he should not drink wine, nor change his food; and he should put on the wound, if there is an abscess that comes, cotton moistened in rose oil only, or in sterilizing wine; and if there is no abscess, then put on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not moved by air, powder, which I will say a little later; and if his arms have moved it, then put on some ointments, as long as he is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like a tailor's cut and similar, and the lips cannot come together by tenting, then stitch them together by sewing, as I will say about wounds of the belly, from sewing.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is exposed to bone, and can, but does not hold except at one point if it is sutured; then treat the wound with medicine, and apply a hard char in place of skin, and command the patient to eat large amounts of food, such as tests and cooked grain, like chickens, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you tear or perforate the skin, and it does not reach to the bone, then suture the entire wound, and pour out pus, then treat it; and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, without cutting it, and it cannot be stanched by medicines, then ligature the artery, and if you tear it, tie it with a thread; and if this does not help, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and you should put this powder that boils like the wound has moved.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the manner of the powder is as follows: take a part of incense; dragon's blood two parts; fresh chalk three parts, and the powder finely, and fill the wound, and bind it tightly, until it heals well and joins with all its own blood; then bind it firmly, and leave it without movement, unless it swells; for one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And never use chalk alone when one does not have incense or dragon's blood, but that the wound has moved.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the wound moves, immediately apply this powder; but put on top some ointments, or flour of oats made with honey and water, until it becomes soft; then treat with other treatments until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if the broken bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with fine forceps; and I will tell you about the main fractures later.
de la plaie dou col	of the neck wound
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound comes from the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between this and the main fractures, but if the neck nerves or the artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is a bone, there is no other method than to let the care, and not put anything restricting, because it hurts bones and makes them retract; and do not put anything sharp on the wound, for the substance of bones is cold, and its continuity is with the brain, which is one of the highest members; but let the medicine be gentle, as calcium washed in hot sweet water, and mixed with rose oil, and the bandage washed also in hot sweet water, and other stones of this kind according to this manner, and moist warm compresses.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then bind it with a bandage, and treat it until it is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	If the wounds are deep and the bone is exposed and full of pus, then drill or go deeper into the bone; and if the artery is cut, and blood flows out, then stop it, and tie it, and cauterize the wound as necessary; and if the spine of the neck is cut, or the ribs, and the lung is exposed, keep it away from the food that goes down, and do not touch the neck but return it to its natural shape; then gradually tighten it, and leave it for some time, then cure the wounds until they are healed; and if the wound has made an impression in the bone, then remove it; and if there are pieces of bone, try to remove all of them, and those that you cannot remove, leave them until the wound heals, and is aligned and cleaned of any pus.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if he has bone in the wound and there is a fistula, then treat it as I have described in his chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound of spear or of dagger
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a wound from a spear or dagger, and the wound is deep, look to see if the hairs on the wound are singed: cut away then that the wound is mortal; and if it is not deep, and it is fresh at all its blood, do not put in the first hour the powder, nor tie it with a bandage for the blood so that it does not clot immediately, and return to the heart, and oil the pain; but put on an attractive ointment, and tie it twice a day; and if you do not have ointment, put in the wound old cotton to draw out the moisture, and let the pain sleep over the wound for three days, or four, or more; then there will be no spasm, nor trembling of the heart from elsewhere; and when you see the good dispositions, cut away that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Cure the wounds of tents and other treatments, as long as they are healed; and if they cannot be healed, and work, then there is a fistula; if the treatment is as it should be.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from an arrow or sword cut, and it is simple, or at the front or back, then the treatment of what is in front; if it is large, stitching; and if it is small, powder, and if it is embedded in the bone, and has broken pieces, then remove the pieces from the wound, and the threads if they are not decayed; and if they are not decayed, let the wound rot, so that the extractions are not harmed; and for other wounds on other limbs is the judgment as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	abdominal rupture
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	1. The rupture of the abdomen is large and medium and small; from the great wound, once the intestines or the nerves of the intestines, by which the infiltration of them; and the suture is more painful, and once the small wound is worse than the great one, because one must put the intestines back, if not put them back in their place; because the intestines swell quickly when they feel the cold, then put them back more carefully, and because the medium-sized wound is worth less, because one must mend the intestines to their place as with other ones II And there are four ways that the rupture of the abdomen is according to: the two common sutures are in the suture of the abdomen, and the suture of the other wounds of the body and two other sutures proper are common to other wounds; and nevertheless they are more proper with the suture of the abdomen, and I will say one by one and declare.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small, and nothing from the inside is forced out, and it is easy to put back, it is done by one of the two methods: either by the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is inflated by the heat.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is hot, heat it in this manner: moisten a sponge or a handful of dry cloth, or cook it in boiling water and vinegar and salt, and roll the intestine until it is softened; and never do this with restraining force, and it is better to let it cool to avoid injury.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling departing, if the intestines are moist from sharp or high and misshapen things, because by this they are aligned and enter quickly; and if it cannot enter, make a small incision with the instrument used to remove foreign bodies; and the first care is to stop the bleeding, as we do not cut without great necessity. And this is the tool for cutting: slice from within the belly and outside, and cut through the form:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged and the intestines have jumped out, if you can put them back in their natural form according to their own place, because this is good.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is large and it is in the part outside of the belly, it is necessary that you make the patient lie on their back, and put their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the part outside of the belly, put the head and the worst part higher than the other parts, and thus manage as I said for large and medium-sized wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	For small wounds, use what is at hand, then place your hands between the wound and put the painful parts together; this is the common way of stitching, and you should use needles or several, depending on the size of the wound, leaving a space of two fingers' width from the edge of the wound, and then thread a needle with strong thread; and pierce the two edges of the skin with the needle, which is outside the skin, until you make it pierce through that part, and bring together the two ends of the needle four times; then wind the thread around the needle twice, and evenly stitch the wound, leaving a space of two fingers' width, and then thread another needle; and tie the thread as you did with the first needle, and do not stop doing this until the whole wound is stitched; and the needles should be medium-sized, between thin and thick, because thin needles cover the entire wound, and thick ones cannot enter well: for this reason, they should be medium-sized; and do not place the needles too far from the skin and flesh, so that they do not cut the wound before the sewing; and then cover the ends of the needles with bandages or cloth to keep them in place, and leave them until the wound is sewn; this way of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because it requires only one needle or two: when you have pierced these parts together, pull the needle to the part where you started, as if you were drawing a thread; and leave a space between each stitch the thickness of a finger.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I brought back the intestine after it had been for 24 hours missing, and the wound was dressed with 15 hours, and cured, and was healed.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And the mother had thought that he would die, and it was a miracle; and I did not treat him with any medicine, for I was in a place where none were found, nor any medicines; and I put wet cotton twice a day over the wound, and washed it with vinegar until he was healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Or I will tell you the two main ways of sewing: take the needle and the thread from the inside to the outside; when it has pierced the right through the right, place the head of the suture or stitch where you have inserted the needle, and pierce it from the other side of the inside to the outside; and the understanding of this sewing is that you sew as the furrier makes the furs, and leave one end of the suture once, and take it up again from the other side, until the sewing is completely finished.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second way of sewing, which Galen properly calls, is such that anyone can do, who assemble the two parts together naturally, and apply one of the main needles to the other head, in this manner: stick a needle or main needle close to the wounded part, and make it pierce only that one alone, and leave the two wounds; then turn the needle, and make it pierce from the front part inside, the two wounds, then pierce both from the front part inside, in two other needles that are on the other side; and this is the easiest way of sewing and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	If this is said by a woman, and no one testifies against it, then the stomach should be sewn with two needles, or one in each; and one needle should be inserted from one side and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew corroies; and sucked that when the rupture is in the stomach, it is sewn more painfully than other stitches of the stomach.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgment of the wound is like that of other wounds: and it is that when you remove the fresh wound completely, as soon as the art has moved it, you reset the intestine and the skin; then put on the powder mixed with char, and if the art has moved it, put on any ointment present until the wound heals; and bind the bandage, and be sure of the sifac and the mirror; then treat the wound as the others, until it is healed; and if you do not have medicines, put on cotton cloth immediately when it begins to bleed, and move it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For in many positions of wounds that are simple, and if you doubt whether the wound does not communicate with principal members, then it is necessary to make a light mollification around the angles, and on the joints; and if it feels pain or putrefaction in the belly, and often happens, then clysterize with black wine, and immediately if the putrefaction comes to the intestines; and perforate within, and cut out what is inside, as for the large intestines, it is lighter to heal than the small.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine called "jeun" cannot heal when it is exposed, and this is due to the smallness of the veins that are, and because of the subtlety of the whole body, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the splinter jumps out of the wound, put it back in place as the intestine, while it is fresh; and if it is old and turned black, then you must tie the part that has turned black, so that blood does not come between, for there are veins and arteries; then cover what is between the limbs, and put the two needles hanging from the part away from the wound, to align the extraction when the splinter breaks, and the wound closes.
de la routure dou boueil	of the breakage of the bone
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is punctured, and the wound is small, it can be restored to some people, because I saw that one man was gutted by a lance; and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and was inflamed and became a fistula, and inside were feces and vomit; I put care according to what I knew, and did not stop until it was healed, and the wound closed.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw him sewing, I doubted that the hairs had no harm in his belly; but there was no harm, only he remained in better positions, and changing and drinking; and the experimenters said that when he has a small wound in the intestine, he should be bound in this way: take warm baths, then gather the lips of the wound, and when the warmth has opened the mouth, put it over the two lips, so that it holds his mouth closed; then cover the wound, and hold it in such a way that he cannot dislodge it, then apply the other warmth in this way as before, until the wound is completely healed.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	If the chief of the shoulder is burned inside, and no harm comes to the hairs, and it can be tied with a thin thread that is taken from the intestine of an animal, in this manner: take the end of this intestine thread that is very dirty, and then tie it to the end of this thin thread, then pull the thread into the needle, and sew the intestine, and pull it back into the hole; and this method of stitching is only as far as the way of hope and expectation; and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the intestines, there is no remedy or cure, except by subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula or where it is
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	all wounds or abscesses, when they appear, are universally called "fistulas", and specifically when they are cut and opened.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And fistula is according to its hard and white, dry, and where there is no pain, and it is cut as a pen quill; and sometimes it is clear and thick; sometimes small and sometimes enough; and I have spoken about it in the division of wounds, that any wound that is not healed, and there is no pus, except by one of the EIGHT causes: that is, by the smallness of the blood or flesh; or by its malice; or because there is hard pus inside and on the lips, which does not allow new pus to form; or there is too much pus; or the eyes are swollen, and the matter is of bad quality; or the medicine is not good in the cure; or because the corruption is in the manner of pestilence; or because the property in the region is late digestion, and late health, and flows by nature; or there are veins or bones: and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	It is necessary for me to inform you of the treatment of fistulas made by manual work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Fistulas can occur in all members of the body; for there are fistulas that come to great veins, and to arteries, and to nerves, or to the face, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to any of the ribs, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet; and if they come to the property of the main member, and similar ones.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	All fistulas of this kind are of great discomfort, and there is only labor and ignorance; and if there is any fistula that does not come from the joint that I have mentioned, and you have confidence in the cure, and you know how to treat it, if it is straight, take a tin or iron tent, and if it is curved, take a subtle tent of cloth, for the cloth plies around the twist; and if the fistula is perforated and you cannot well encircle it by tents, then cauterize one of the perforations, for the moisture does not come out from one perforation to another, and cleanses it; then carefully apply it to your power, that you know if there is bone or nerve, and if it is deep in the joint, and ask the patient well about the pain he feels when you press with your hand, and the location where he feels it; and when you will truly know the location where it is, and whether it is far from the joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, then treat according to what I have told you, and remove the faulty part and the corrupted flesh that is inside; and then treat until it is healed, and if the fistula is deep at the right place, then cut it open as much as you can, then put moistened tents in medicine water, and pour them into the top of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the superfluous part that remains at the bottom; and then apply ointments with clean cloth, as long as they are healed; and if they are not healed by this, then cauterize as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted from the fistula, then treat.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If the vein or nerve does not cause harm to your principal limbs, as we have said; and if the tooth is exposed, and there is corruption and blackness, then remove the corruption until it is completely removed, then cure the things injured by the tooth as long as they are healthy; and if they are not healthy, and remain bowed as before, cut off that part which you have already removed: if it reveals and wishes to come out as far as you can reach, and remove all the corruption, then restore the limb; and if it is thus healthy, it is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If not, then it is too deep in the bone, and you cannot reach it; there is no other method except to leave it to nature; and if there is a small bone corrupted, and you can pull it out with pincers, then remove it with the appropriate instrument, and if there are many bones, then take them all out, and do not leave any behind; and if moisture makes it contrary, and there is no error or fear, then treat and moisten and char, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot remove them within an hour, place something soothing on the wound, and leave it until the flesh is completely surrounding the bone, and then the bones will be lighter; and if it is a large bone, such as a leg or thigh, if the corruption has spread so much that the bone is completely rotten, then cover the wound; and if there is a great part of the corruption that comes close to the bone; if it should be and cover all around the corruption, and then cure it until it is sound; and I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you can take example and help in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	When the young man was around 30 years old, he had pain in his leg due to a cause that came from within the body, so that the matter came to the leg, and it was filled with a large abscess, and there was no reason to open it; but the doctor by their folly opened it so high that the abscess opened, and there were many matters coming out, and became a fistula, and there was much pain that everyone was groaning and moisture in the body; and many doctors treated him within two years, and there was no cure in the art of hands, until I was called, and saw his leg and the medicines with which they were treating it, and what was coming through the fistula to the great body; and his body became red like the young man, and had a yellow color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I pitched a tent in one of these holes, and then I searched all the holes, and found that one was coming into contact with the other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I then stretched out my hand into one of the holes until I discovered a part of the bone, and found it rotten and perforated, and the corruption was coming to the bone from inside; I saw that the rotten bone appeared to me, and I thought there was no other corruption except what I had seen; and I began to treat the wound with various medicines for a long time, but could not heal it; then I returned and discovered the bone as before, and found the continuous corruption in the bone, and saw it, and then I removed it, and I was unable to heal the limb; but I could only wrap around a palm of the bone and treat it entirely, then I applied medicines; and it became healthy and healed quickly, and did not require any further treatment except for the weakness of the pain, which could not bear it, and for the fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For the evacuation of blood often occurred, but he was healed entirely, and in place of the bone grew a hard cartilage, and it was of good disposition and had no harm or contradiction throughout, neither to the left nor to the right.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be done in this way: take a bandage, and stretch it at the head of the bone that opens, and command that it be extended upwards; and place another bandage of thicker material than the first bandage, above the cartilage that is on top of the bone, and extend the head, so that you can remove the rotten cartilage from below, and uncover the cartilage above the part where you see it should be, so that it does not rot; and place a poultice or a bandage outside the bone to cover the rotten cartilage; and it should be done in such a way that one can see and feel the corruption, and it should be done again.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if the tooth is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, remove the tissue completely; then put on the bandage from one part to the other, and sew the corruption, and let the stitch be as long as possible, as we have said; and if the corruption is in the joint, cover the joint with the corrupted part, and sew the bone or the part it contains from the other side; and if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, there is no other remedy than to cover; and if the corruption is at the tip of the hand or the foot, it is very difficult, but nevertheless you should inquire about that corrosion, how it opens; and cleanse it in all ways possible, but do not let the vein or the nerve do harm; and know that the instruments for covering these bones are many, according to the shape of the bones and the appearance of the teeth, and their size and subtlety, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness; and therefore you should arrange each kind of work with its corresponding tool; and know that the work will show you the tool you have to use, according to your knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of diseases; so consider the tool you have to use according to what it is suitable for.
dou feu	with fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The members will rot either due to the lack of nourishment or due to lack of strength; and when you have cured that corrosion by the medicine of the cures, and it does not improve, then it is necessary to cover that member up to the place where the corrosion comes from, so that the pain escapes through the mouth or by the malice, which is greater, of the lack of the member; and the signs are that the member becomes black, so that it seems as if it were burned by fire, and becomes blacker afterwards, as those corrosions of members spread from one to another, and take hold of the whole body; if you hasten to cover, and if it is due to the sting of some poisonous animals, such as scorpions of the sea and snakes and similar ones, if the corrosion is at the head of the hand, then cover and do not give them any space to come to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And if it comes to the hand, if the cope is at the joint, so that the corrosion does not come to the arm; and if it comes to the arm, if the cope at the shoulder; and if it passes the shoulder, it is death, and there is no remedy other than the quantity of its virtue; and thus do as the corrosion comes or pierces: if it comes to the first joint, if the cope after the other joint; and if it comes where the pain is, if the cope all the pain; and if it goes up the leg, if the cope at the knee joint; and if it comes above the knee, there is no other means than the patient lies on his back and the assistants hold one end of the limb, and the other assistants hold the other end of the limb, and they dry the char between the two limbs to the span wide, until the bone is revealed; then the cope or cloth, and put a piece of linen on each part so that the cloth does not touch the uninjured skin, and it comes to other injury and abscess.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And if bleeding comes when you are working, cauterize the wound quickly, or apply some powders that stop the bleeding; then return to your medicine until it is completed, then bandage the injured limb with a convenient bandage, and treat it until it is healed; and I will tell you what happened to a man in great pain: he had a wound that looked like burning by fire, and that corrosion first came to his right side, taking over the whole side; and when the honorable man saw the corrosion, he covered the wound, and was healed; and long afterwards the corrosion came again from the other side of the hand, and it came to me, and I put things on after cleansing the body, and could not stop the corrosions; and he said that I would cut off his hand, and I would not, because I had hope of reflecting the matter; and he also doubted that if I cut off his hand, he would not die, for the virtues of the man were weak; and he gave up all hope, and returned to his land, and covered his hand, and was healed; and I have not told this except for the reason that one should do something else if one has such a matter.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	Never does an abscess form in a wound that is not properly cleaned, and it remains for such a long time that it causes a great collection of pus; then it bursts and drains, and the pus jumps out, and the wound remains open like a wound that has not healed, and the skin above is also as thin as cloth and does not adhere to the bone or nerve, and such a disease is called "sinus", and is not called "fistula"; but if it is so long that it reaches the bone from the front, it is called "fistula"; and the skin is such that you cover all of it with cloth, and immediately when it is thin, as if it were cloth; and it does not remain for its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	If the skin is hardened and the corruption is not yet in full force, and the skin is charred, then use this ointment for healing: look to see if the breasts are large, and the nipples have a foul odor, then make an Egyptian-style ointment as follows: take equal parts of aloe, oil, and litargyr, mix them with heat in a vessel over the fire until the medicine turns red and thickens like honey; then take according to your need, and make it into a thin and thick paste, and apply the ointment to the breasts, and hold the nipple; leave the medicine on for two hours, then remove it by sprinkling; do this many times until the breasts are clean and healed; if the pain is too great, and the Egyptian ointment and water ash do not help, then apply an ointment of water and honey or a little litargyr broken up; or use an ointment of honey and wine melted, which has the property of cleaning and washing, and the wine makes the skin soft; when you have done this, and you are sure the breasts are clean, then apply an ointment made of rose oil and wine; or use some medicines and ointments, as I have described their properties for treating wounds; if the nipple of the breast is small, and the ointment cannot enter, then enlarge it with a small needle, and put in an Egyptian-style tent of the ointment or basilicon ointment, until it is large enough to enter; if the wound is too large, then leave it alone, and let the skin or lower part of the breast where the ointment can enter, and if the nipple that is above is also foul, then cover it with a cloth.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	For when the wound is in the front, do not let any blood flow; and if you cannot cover the wound as it appears, arrange it in such a way that the wound goes to the lowest part of the body, for when the wound is in the front, do not let any blood flow; and if you cannot cover the wound as it appears, arrange it in such a way: that the wound goes smoothly downwards, and leave nothing of the wound; and take consolidative medicines to put on the wound, and place it on the cloth that covers the whole body; then apply forces at the right place on the wound and a little more than the first, since they are firmly attached to the other cloth according to the quantity of the wound, and place it on the wound to align the wound, and do not remove the large cloth for several days; and whoever is on the wound, often remove to align the wound, and see what comes out of the wound, whether it is poison or a little or enough, or digested, or undigested; and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been applied in a certain way and you see the nature that rises over the wound, then remove the bandage and approach health; and then remove it in the morning or the next day, and when you remove the wound, change the other cloth, and renew the dressing.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the chest is pushed inward after many hours, push the chest back so it does not remain misaligned.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons are cut after long tension, do not despair of health, for health approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are men who take a long time to heal in their wounds, and others who do the opposite; and if the chest is pushed inward after many hours, push the chest back so it does not remain misaligned; and if the chest lingers in pain and is distant, apply medicines that are moist in substance but dry in virtue, such as diafinit, for there is a great part of glass in it, and this is the last medicine; take diafinit and make it with rose oil and the same amount of old wine in substance; then cook and use it; and the same thing is made with honey when it is boiled on the fire; and then apply it to the chest, and never administer an aristologer long ago and the roots of celestial lily, which is also like flour and hundred; and use simple or composite: grind them and make powder, and put on the honey that I have said, and use it; and if the cure is long and not cured by this cure, then push out the corruption, and make an impression in the bone, or in hard members, or in limbs; then the cure of the cure of fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the elbow
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Panarice is an abscess that arises from the elbow due to a pouch of the hand, or a pimple, or by chance in other places; and when it is drained, and one does not take care, if the abscess comes back, and they continue to pour boiling water until it reaches the root of the elbow, and perhaps it reaches the whole; and then there are corrosions just above the bone, as long as there is pain, and the patient has two large wounds, and the color is red.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	If you treat it as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help much, then you must remove all the excess that remains from the elbow, then cauterize the wound afterward.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cauteries are very great help if the bones are healthy, and the joint is healthy; and if the joint quickly becomes inflamed, and begins to prick, and the wound, then it is necessary to remove the bone that does not allow the char to penetrate, and bring it up high, and cover this char subtly and gently, and put on top of the remaining char medicines burning and corrosive to eliminate everything; then cure the wound until it is healthy.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corrosion is in the bone, then cover it and drain, because as much as the bone is corrupted, it cannot be healed; and if you see that another is also corrupted, then cover it as described above, and cure it until it is healthy; and if it is fierce, and protrudes, and it causes great pain, then first heal it; then cover the joint with a thin layer of strong acid in cutting across, and make sure that the cut does not come close to the char that is outside the joint, because the pricks would cause too much pain; and if there is, then put something on top that soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The sharp pain of the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The sharp pain that arises in the hands of some men by chance is all chronic, and sometimes it is in the fingers or where there are bones, and never in the nail, and none of them arise at the root of the joint, or in any of the ten fingers.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Those who arise in no part of the finger do not move, and those who arise at the joint of the finger, by chance move; the length of the one who is chronic is light, in this manner: cut it at its root with a wide spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Those who arise at the root of the joint are difficult to cure: if you hold the copper.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In those who are born or must be at the back, it is necessary that you first cut the round bone reasonably close to the bone, then cut the bone to a suitable silk according to this, then cure it until it is healed.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The same things that come together in two ways come from birth or from the wound, or from burning of fire, or from similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	If it is necessary that you cut the wound, so that what should return to its natural forms; then put between two tents or moistened cloths in rose oil, so that it does not suppurate; or you put between two pieces of fine linen, until the wound is healed, as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	When it comes to both of his hands with the palm, if that suits the healing as it should.
des vils	of the base
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	Veins are large and swollen with excess melancholy, which come in many members of the body; and more so in legs of those who walk and work and carry, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you should never administer any purgative of clay, and then give the healthy one from the basilica.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The treatment of iron is in two ways: one is that you apply it, and draw out the black blood; and the other way is that you open the vein, and draw out all the blood.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The tail is done in this way: first, the first leg of high hot water very strong, until the big without being subtly removed, then straighten the leg with the bad from above the hip to the part below the groin; then cut the vein in the thigh, or in II or III, of a wide incision, then release and pull out the black blood to your hand, from one to the other, until as much blood can be suffered by the bad from the leg; and then tie it, and command that he boil meat infusion with black pepper; and repeat the evacuation and cleaning when the veins are flat, and not bent to the bad.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The treatment of the leg with this method: if there is much hair, shave it off and put it in hot water for as long as it turns red and swells the veins; if you don't have hot water, heat it over a fire, then apply hot compresses to the vein, either at the knee or on the side of the leg, then rub the skin all around the vein until it appears, which will be red and black, and looks like a white cord; then boil the rag outside, as long as it is not too hot, and place it on the vein, then lightly bandage the other side with a thin cloth, then apply another compress to the other side for about three days; then scrape the skin over the vein until it appears, then tie it to the pain, as you have done before, then bandage it again with another cloth, then pull and lift it to the second size; then cut the bandage from size to size, as long as it is all healed, then bandage it; if you cannot pull and lift it, drive an awl through the thread twice as thick as the thread, and pull and lift it back and forth, as long as there is any; be careful not to let it stick, for if it sticks, it cannot be pulled or lifted, and it will harm the wound; when you have treated it all, place a soft cloth soaked in wine and rose oil on the sore.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	If the vision is contracted and twisted and enveloped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must correct it severely, but do not cover it completely; and treat it as we have previously described.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The form of iron that is used to cover the eye, if it is curved, and does not cut into the vein; and it is large in size, because if it were thin, it would cut into the vein, but if it is thick as we have said, this is the form:
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is opened in the legs, in warm parts where there are no herbs or trees, and in dry land; and by chance it opens elsewhere than in the legs, and this has to do with the porridge that comes out of the skin, as it comes from within the body serpents and worms, opened between the skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are such that it comes in the leg a very large inflammation, then the limb changes, and the vein begins to issue forth, like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the vein opens, it is necessary to wrap around a piece of cloth of one and a half inches wide and long enough to cover the limb, and tie the cloth, leaving the cloth on the leg, and every time it is not attached to the limb, if you wrap it around the cloth, and tie it; and if it is too long, cut off part of it, and wrap the remaining part, and do not cover its root until it is all out; for if you cover it, it will return to the vein, and cause abscess and rot in the limb, and severe disease; therefore it is necessary that it be treated little by little from the top, and nothing remains or corrupts; and this vein never occurs when it is treated with herbs of length one palm or ten, and some have come to me, which issued from ten palms in length, and when you cover it, it will burst the skin or puncture, and perforate it from bottom to top, so that everything comes out; and let the matter that is inside be drained, and administer medicines for rot every day, then cure as with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And sometimes at this vein, it does not rain, and especially when it opens in the joint of the little finger, or the big toe, and there is much pressure, and from which it can rain; therefore, as we have said before, cure it accordingly.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	of verses that are born between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called in our land "cow disease", because it often affects cows, and it is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the body, ascending and descending, and is felt well in each member to member, until it reaches the skin where it went, and jumps out; and it is caused by some humors, such as come vers and serpents and lumbrics and ascarides or intestines; and there is doubt about its malice, for when it goes through the body, and it ascends to the head, and it comes to the brain, perhaps entering, and destroys the brain; and this has happened many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see the patient and treat them, it is necessary that you hold the limb above and away from a very tightly bound place, then cut across and pull it out, and if it turns in front of the char, you do not remove it, but cauterize with fire until it dies; and the greatest harm it does is that it spreads oil, as we have said; and if you see it coming or approaching near the oil, hold it away from it firmly, then cut across and pull it out; and it is necessary to use the remedy of wound healing of corpses of medicines dissolved for the bad humors caused by diseases, and if it becomes swollen with indigestible food.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of the pain that comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is called in our land "windiness", and it is a pain that comes in some members, and it moves from member to member; and I see what I tell you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to a sick woman, and she revealed to me one of her arms, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm; and soon after, I saw it rise as high as a worm at the shoulder, faster than anything, like live silver when it cuts through flesh; the pain departed from that arm, and went into the shoulder, and then a little later it spread throughout the body, until it came to the other arm; then she told me that she turned around inside the body, as I saw.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was greatly amazed at how it moved from one limb to another, for I had never seen this disease move in this way.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	However, I had heard that it could move from one limb to another, but I had not seen it do so in this way; and I thought that this was because the woman had a dry body, and her veins were exposed, and because that constraint appeared; and it did not appear in this way to those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and covered veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see this disease and the pain it causes, if it appears as we have said, then hold the limb above and below quickly, and then cover it with a cloth until that constraint is released from the limb; and cauterize the limb; and if you do not see it in your eyes, then treat the cause of that constraint, such as fetid pills, and serpentine pills, and similar others.
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are various, according to their appearances and according to the types of bodies they penetrate.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The variety of them is such that there are arrows with large points, and small ones, and barbed, and sharp; and those with two angles, and those with tongues, and those with pieces; and the one that pierces any member as it pleases: whether in a principal member, such as the head, heart, liver, spleen, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When it pierces any of these members, and the sign of death, which I will tell you afterwards, is apparent: then you must proceed with the extraction of this arrow, for death comes after in many ways; and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not completely out, then pull it out, and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the signs of the skull when the arrow pierces and penetrates the bone, and the spasm that is above the skull, are squinting and swelling and vertigo and dizziness, and inflammation and dizziness of the tongue, and spasms and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile; and perhaps without force of the nose, or of the ears; and perhaps paralysis of speech and voice; and the spasm of the wound with moisture white like chicken, and also like boiling oil; and if these signs appear to you, then take care of the patient, and remove the arrow if it is not already out.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	When the arrowhead is about to enter or exit, it is near the right breast, and it feels as if it were stuck in a hard object, not moving; and perhaps the arrowhead moves like a chicken's beak, and there is black blood, and cold sweat, and syncope: therefore, without doubt, the patient dies.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign that the arrow has not been pulled out is that without complaining of pus, it jumps out of the wound, and the throat swells, and the limbs change color, and it gasps for breath and seeks the cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrowhead is stuck in the roof of the mouth, it is below the small ribs; and it causes great pain and difficulty breathing; and they move all the member of the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrowhead is stuck in the stomach, by chance if it jumps out of the wound nothing of the undigested meat.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrowhead is stuck in the abdomen, and it does not come out through the intestinal wall, there is no hope of cure or extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrowhead is stuck in the bladder, and the urine comes out and flows out, and the pain is very great: cut open the wound as it is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limbs, such as the arms and neck and throat and shoulder and back and spine and hip and knee and feet, and similar members, are safe according to various positions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me, because of what you were doing otherwise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to a man that an arrow hit him in the root of the nose: I tried to remove it, and took it out from the other side of the ear grease, and he was healed without any trouble.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And there was a young man who had an arrow in his fat outside the paper, and the arrow was inserted, and he could not reach it except for the tip facing forward, and the arrow was long like a Turkish bow, all of it was made of iron without ears; the wound was healed, and no bad accidents happened to him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And there was an arrow in the neck of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic with ears: I shaved the beard, and subtly removed it until I removed it, and the Christian was healed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And there was an arrow in a man, which was in his head or belly, and I thought he would die; and after he had passed thirty days, his condition did not change; I cut into the wound, and probed it, and removed it, and there were no bad accidents.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	If you want to help someone who has an arrow stuck in their back or shoulder, and the wound was closed over it; and the arrow remained inside, and did not change its natural positions, nor found harm in any of its natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And another man, who had an arrow stuck in his face, and the wound was closed over it; and it remained like that, suffering great pain; and many similar cases.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And an arrow was shot at the man of the prince, the king, who had it in his neck, and was slightly inclined to the right side; and the arrow was completely inserted, I was called to cure after it had been there for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	If the wound is very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I applied a thin tent to it, and I did not feel anything; but he felt a sharp pain and discomfort on the right side of his ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was the tip of the arrow sticking out; I applied a poultice of attractive digestive herbs to it because the wounds were not inflamed, and then I saw the arrow's point.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I applied the poultice again, and immediately closed the wound, and then he felt the arrow's point long and tense, as if it were inside his nose; and he told me so.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I placed medicine of corrosive acid on the wound by hand, as long as it was open, and tried to remove it, and felt the tip of the arrowhead which remained in the flesh; then I applied more medicine of corrosive acid into the opening of the wound, until the arrowhead appeared visibly; and it passed well through the ends within four months, and then began to decay if the wound that I had put nails on one side and the other, and could not get out; therefore, I did not cease to subtilize and engineer in various ways of instruments, until I got a good nail on a day, according to what its form would be at the end of this chapter, as long as I pulled it out, and restored the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And the physicians judged that the nasal cartilage could not be restored: I restored it then, and it was dressed with the wound, and the pain was healed entirely.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Or I have told you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you may place your care where I do not say, for the books cannot contain all; but the wise masters know well a great many things, and what is present and lacking, find nine works, and nine instruments, in the understanding of things strange that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows do not issue from the members except in two ways: either by the way they enter, or by another part; and that which sails through the way it enters, is an arrow entering into its flesh, and has never been out once.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if she does not jump now, let her stay until the charcoal is fully cooked and ready to issue; and also if she is stuck in the bone, and cannot get out, let her stay thus for some time, and move her every day; and then she will jump, and if she does not jump, then perforate around all the forest subtly, until the bones inside are widened, and then remove it.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is stuck in the head bone, and goes towards one of the bellies of the brain, and any of the accidents that I have mentioned to the patient: do not remove it, but let her stay until it is even after some time, for if the arrow comes towards the face, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is not firmly lodged in the bone only, and does not come out by itself, and stays for several days without causing harm, then use the device to pull it out.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is deeply lodged and cannot be pulled out, then apply tar as I have told you; then treat the limb until it is healed.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is in the body and cannot be seen, then apply tar to the entire wound; and if you feel it, then remove it with any suitable instrument; and if you cannot because of the narrowness of the wound, and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein, then leave it until the wound is large enough; and remove the arrow if you can, and if it has ears that hold it in place, then carefully remove the char that is firmly attached to both sides of the wound as much as you can, and then break or crush the ears of the arrow until you can remove it; and be careful not to break the arrow when removing it.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it once, then push the lung back inside through the ribs, as extraction causes pain.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the bleeding from the vein makes it difficult for you, follow what we have said about the treatment in its chapter; and guard against cutting into the nerve and the vein, and use caution as you draw out the arrow without danger, or quickly or firmly or tightly; and put the painful part according to the form it was in when the arrow fell off, for this is the greatest help that there is, and if you cannot do so, follow what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The arrow that comes from another part, where it opens nothing of it, or the skin is swollen in the place where one can see or feel it: cut then above, as much as the hooks can take, and then extract it: if it has now burst.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is retained in the bone, round your hand and push it into the bone until it enters, then expand the bone, then remove it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot come out, leave it still, and then restart the extraction until it comes out; and if there is arrow shaft left, give it all at once; and if it is sharp, and you are administering it gently, if you administer the instrument with a hair, so that the point of the arrow enters the hair of the instrument; and then give it all at once, and if the arrow is pulled out, pull the instrument in entering, to facilitate the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is embedded, it is necessary that you cut out all of the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, then treat the wound as appropriate.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow is stuck in the chest or abdomen or bladder or ribs, and it is close, and you can cut through, then cover it if you can; do not cut into the vein and nerve, and then extract it, and then treat the wound if necessary; and the treatment until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the forceps used to extract arrows is similar to a bird's beak, and here is the form:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many ways: large, medium, and small, according to the amount of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the arrowhead is like the beak of a bird, to stick into the point of the arrow, such as this shape.
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The shape of the barbs to stick and to hold is like this:
des voinnes dou cors communes	veins common to the body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	There are 31 veins that can be opened, of which 16 have heads, namely: two that are behind the ears, called "herbech"; and the two arteries that are in the temples apparent; and the two veins that are in the arm pits of the eyes, called "aspires"; and the vein that is in the front; and the vein that is at the top of the nose; and the two nerves that are on the neck; and the two veins that are on the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins called "augeherich"; and the two veins outside the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The common veins that are usually cut are five in each arm: one is the cephalic, and it is on the right side, and it is called "the great vein"; and the middle one is called "the basilic", and it is composed of the cephalic and the basilic, and it is called "the vein of the heart"; and the basilic is on the left side, and it is called "the vein of the belly", and it is above the fossa, and it is that one which is usually cut, which opens clearly above the fossa.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the saphenous vein is the one that is between the auricular and annular, and it is on the right arm; and in the leg and where the foot is, there are three veins: one is outside the corbeure of the left side costeit, and the second is at the knee of the right side costeit; and the vein that is called "nesse", which is at the knee of the other side; and in the other leg there are three veins.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	For the shoulder joint, which is after the ears, helps with ancient enemas and migraines; and the quality of the sauna, as I tell you, and is that you remove the head of the pain, and rub the skin where the ears are on a rough cloth; then strangle the pains neck to a rope, until the two ears appear behind the ears in two directions from the head: then give it to your hand, and where you feel the hair of your hand, if it is sore; then take the lancet, and push it out of the ear towards the bone, then lift your hand to the whole ear above, and scrape and the skin and the ear well it should be through the traversing, and make the blood come out until you see; then strain and tie, as long as it is healthy; and I have already said the incision and the cauterization in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	The first line translates to: "For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The sain of the vein in the forehead is as valuable as the sain of the cerebral diseases of the face, headache, and rheum; and the quality is such that the pain is strange, twisting the neck until the vein appears; then take the instrument called «fosseur», which has this form:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And put the point on the vein, and hold it with your hand or something else, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you see; then release the neck from the pain, and tie the vein until it is healed and never again with a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	It does not matter whether the flames are too sharp or not, and the cut should be across, because the bone is close, and by chance it may break the flames when it is thin.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The cutting of the two veins that are in the two arms helps to those at the elbow, and at the wrist, and at the root, and at the eye in the oil, and for diseases of the face; and the quality of their cut is such that the pain is strained by twisting any limb, as before; then the cut, and let the cut be across, a little long with the flame, a little wide, because there is no char.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	If the flames are thin, perhaps it will break; then correct the blood, as much as you have skill, and then tie it with thread, and tie it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The vein of the nose is not good for a headache and fever, and for diseases of the face, such as migraines and headaches that come in the face, and always when it is old; and the quality of the vein is that the pain is strained on its neck, then strain its nose to your right hand, and take the thin flame long, and put it on the lip in the space between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well, and the blood will now begin to flow; do not move too much in front, and correct the blood according to your need, then tie it for a night, because it is soon restored; and this is the shape of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The salve of the second kind helps to narrow the alainne, and at the beginning of the meselerie, and with many diseases, and with empetigine, and with corrosions, and with herpes, and estiomenes; and the quality of the salve is such that the pains strangely pull away from one and the other, as we have said; and so the masters are above the chief of the pains, and the pains sit on one seat, then clean the vein with a long one slightly wide, then drain the blood promptly, or as much as the matter requires; then make another in the other vein, then release the limb, and hold the veins evenly, so that the pains do not strangle; and let it rest until morning, so that the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	of the health of the liver
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The health of the liver above helps to cool in the mouth, and prevents tooth decay, and cracks in the lips, and mouth sores and around.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the quality of the health is to make the pain disappear in front of you, and hold its neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at both the veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left, and they are known by the fact that they are black, and by the fact that around them there are small black veins: therefore match both, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt, then match the largest of each part, and do the same with the two veins that are above and below, for it is the same way.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	of the tongue's disorder
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The disorder of the veins that are outside the tongue is helped after the disorder of the cephalic, and it is by constricting the throat, and with diseases of the eye, and with diseases of the mouth; and the quality of the sailor is such that the diseases are between your hands before the sun, and he lifts the tongue, and looks out from each side one black vein: therefore heal both and do not move too much, for outside are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the ear that are commonly healed are healed in two ways: either by pinching at all the flame murderous, or by subtle cuts as if cutting through, and is called "anesil"; and they are wide and subtle according to the width and constriction of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the flame mirror is very famous, and is as wide as you see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it has the skill to open veins that are closed and flat with large blood visible, and that contain large blood and turmoil; and this is the form of the flame mirror.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	And it is more subtlely pointed, and is for purifying veins that are subtle, where there is subtle blood yellow.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The purification of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are outside the neck, and where the collarbone, and where the shoulder, and where the belly; and it is necessary for the purifier to purify wisely, and to separate the artery that is outside.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if he cuts the artery, and blood flows out, it should be cooled, as I have said; and it should not be pricked with fire, but cut off as I have said.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the priest does not clearly open it, it is necessary to remove and replace it; or you want any rain of it, or you smear it in place of the vein on the arm: it opens clearly; and he cuts it off as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you know the vein of the sinew, it is necessary to remove and stretch the arm until you touch the vein; then sign the vein of the elbow, and then tie the arm, and cut the vein with fire as we have said; and watch that you do not cut into the artery when you see the vein swell, for it is the artery: avoid it then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it protruding high as a child's urine, and the blood is red and subtle, it is from an artery: hurry then, and place your hand longwise, then remove your hand without stopping, as many times as it happens; hold the arm still, and leave it thus, and do not move the hairs until it is healed; and be afraid, and do not move it until it is healthy.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the blood is not stopped, and it hurts you, and the medicine is not present, then cut open the artery if it opens, for the main part of the blood is drawn; and stop the bleeding.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	Take a small splinter of bread, and make it into a poultice, and take one half and place it on the other side; if it is not moistened, it is good; if not, then the cure, as we have said, with powders that moisten wounds; and the moistening is not greasy in many positions for the small wound of the limb, and the position of the bandage of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The vein in the middle is helped if it treats blood from above, and the body from below, because it is composed of the basilic and cephalic, as we have said; and it is necessary for the bandage to go through all the nerves that are out of place, and if it does not too much in front, and it finds the nerve, and it inflates and the salve is either greasy, and perhaps cannot heal; and this nerve often opens, and if it does not open in any man because of its subtlety, then you must use the bandage from the instrument anesil; and protect the nerve to your power.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if he has a vein between the two nerves, then cut it long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The cephalic vein is helpful, as it draws blood from the head and helps with those; and it should be tapped by pricking the olive oil or mint leaf, for this is the safest of all veins, for there are no nerves or arteries in it.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	However, it is best to seek the lightest vein, and do not hurt anything if you cannot find it the first time, and then try again; and sometimes the veins swell in some people, but it does not matter the first time.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of health depends on your thoughts.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you need to know about hygiene is that hygiene is only intended to maintain health and to ward off diseases to come; and it should be done in one of the three ways that are either cold or warm: namely, cephalic, federal, and basilic; and if one must practice hygiene at the beginning of the day, in the morning, and in the evening after eating, when the sign of repletion appears; and if one must practice hygiene on the first or third day, after two hours or three days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The healing salve that is administered to diseases has no fixed duration, but rather depends on the age and strength of the patient, in all hours and in all times; and it does not suit to heal children under the age of fourteen, nor a pregnant woman except for the first four months after the seventh.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	Nor should one heal the old who have passed sixty years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	When one wishes to heal, in any way that may be, it is necessary for him to cleanse the intestines of a light clyster, if he has much feces retained, so that the veins do not attract the excessive and harmful superfluities to the main members; nor should one heal those who are too fond of meats, or drunkards, as much as they may be, or hydrocaphiacs; and if one wishes to heal after a colic passion, vomiting, diarrhea, and frequent abdominal travels, pregnancy, watching, and fasting, and whatever the virtue, whether by an armor or a body; then subtly the humors, if it is not too thick, by foods and drinks and medicines, if you have them; then take a bath or a shower, if nothing prevents, to subtilize the blood, and heal from the vein about the third hour, as we have said; and guard that day of work, and of pining, and of luxury, and of similar things; and be bound and joined, and let the healer be higher than those who heal, and let the friction of the arm twice or three times, then strain the joint gently, for when it is too strong or weak, it cannot correct the sin; and then friction the hand on the limb, as long as the veins swell, and feel that they are on; then wipe the healer with a little flame of old oil, then put his dose of his right hand above the vein of the limb wherever he wishes to heal, so that the vein does not fail to strike.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	Because there are veins that flee as if they were strings to the leeches, and if there are such ones that are plain of spaciousness, so that when one puts on the flame, it retreats from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus is one of those; and if it opens the vein, then the wound is too tight, because it is necessary that the leeches be advised in these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens the first time, it is good; if not, then one should try again a little below that vein or higher, if the leeches are not inflated.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	If the joint is swollen, and the pain subsides within one or two days, and you do not bind the arm: perhaps it will become infected; do not enter water, then begin the healing if it pleases him; and if the wound is small, or without a cut, gently and subtly cut into it, and you doubt that there will be much blood as you saw, then firmly apply the flame directly to that wound; and the work is done roughly, provided the joint is swollen; for this often happens, when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the joint swelling, do not begin the healing again, and place a little oil on it, for it alleviates the flow of blood, and is useful in this joint as the oil; and thus administer the oil in every healing that you heal the wounds, to stop the flow of blood; and this also does three times and boils down, when placed on the joint; gently cut into it and spread it out when it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	If there are large abscesses that often occur, even when not treated until this time or the opening of the vein is small, you must hurry and place a soft sponge soaked in boiling water and wrapped in a cloth on the limb for an hour; and it is necessary to do this after the issue of the blood from the vein, and if it remains on the limb for any length of time without turning black or green, you must not remove it; and if you see any sign of discoloration, place something like aloe or mercurous chloride mixed with honey or calamint on it.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often it appears as an abscess and the appearance of the base of the church: place your hand on it, and if you feel the bone pressing under your hand, that is the wrong appearance.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, do not put anything on it that we have said, because by chance you might cut the artery; but first apply a dry plaster to harden the bone, then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And follow each vein according to the quantity of its virtue and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it flow until it becomes thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is suitable for those who are weak and unable to bear the pain, and those who have the skill of arrow extraction, one should make a larger wound, and let the flames be wide; and for those who are weak, do the opposite, and let them rest often, and let the wound be cauterized by cutting across, not by pricking; and this method of cauterization is safe from the breaking of bones and the tearing of nerves, and it is better than the cauterization done long or wide.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for those whose body needs cauterization, it is suitable to give them bread moistened in the juice of green pomegranates; if they are hot-tempered, take out the arrow three or four times and apply the cauterization; and if they are of cold constitution, before the cauterization, give them bread moistened in honey syrup, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and strong-smelling syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he palms the wound after much bleeding of blood, it is necessary that he drink broth of char, and sweet-smelling syrup, and use other things that we have said in the division or chapter of syncope, for the evacuation of blood.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to strengthen an arm, and wound again, it is necessary, when he is weakened by much bleeding, that he bandage gradually and gradually, according to the amount of its continuous virtue.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And if he wants to wound again an arm after the first bleeding, and he has great pain, he should bandage seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the second hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever wishes to heal on the other side, they should heal according to the second hour or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For they have much blood within the body which is already heated, and causes fever; if one must draw out great quantities, and widen the vein until it gushes out; then one must apply all the conditions of healing, and place one's hand upon the pulse as it heals, that the patient does not return to the vein before healing, and this happens many times when the healer is negligent; and one should not press too hard when one sees the arm is ready to be released, and draw out blood the second time, and the vein is closed, but if it is curved, extend the arm gently, for that would be harmful; but let it remain as it heals the second time; or you should not go to the tip of the flame, until the blood frozen in the vein comes out, and put a little ointment on the wound, and press firmly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if it flees, let it go and do not hold it until the abscess is calmed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if necessary, draw the blood from another vein, or from the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is safer than the main one because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	The method of drawing blood is that the hairs are heated in hot water until they turn red; then it is moved gently so that the vein appears well, then draw blood from the side, not too narrow or too long; and make the punctures wide, and draw blood well near the joint of the hand, and if it cannot be released, put the hand in hot water again, and let the blood flow out in the hot water until you have enough; and if it is still there, do not move the hand again, because it will put more in than before; and drawing blood from this vein is safer than all other veins, as there are no arteries or nerves.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The salve of the hand of the right side is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is the way: strain the hand, and boil in hot water until the vein is outflowed, if one can see it; and if the salve is against the way, and if you cover it with all at once, it will not hurt anything; and do not move too much, because the nerves are all exposed to the fire, and then put the hand in hot water, if it is not frozen in the wound, and it cannot come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the arrow as much as is necessary, put oil and silk on the vein to sew quickly, and thus do for each part.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The right side of the hand is useful for the disease of the mouse, and do everything as I have told you on the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The left side of the hand is useful for all diseases that are outside the body, such as diseases of the marsh, retention of urine, and diseases of the feet, knees, and old legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the quality of its hand is that diseases are cured by putting hot and sharp things into it, and rubbing them on the vein until they rot, and tie above the joint; and the vein is at the elbow, and from there many rains come out; therefore, the hand with a large vein or at the elbow is more useful.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you have healthy bones above the joint, and you are warned by the nerves that are dislocated, and the healthy part is crossed as in copulating; and let the flames be equal.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if it cannot issue from the bone, reset the joint in high places, and let the vein well drain.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the first attempt is not successful, start the second attempt above a little, for the bones are salty; do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and thus make the other joint equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The vein of the neck is at the elbow, and its resetting is equal to the pain of the back, when it comes to arrow removal.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the quality of his health is such that the hairs between or in bathing, and is strange above the ankle four times in twisting, because otherwise it does not open the vein; and if she opens, then heal in all ways that you can, and transversely; and it is worth while to cover, for the less are salty, and it is very replete with hands of men.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not straighten it, then heal none of those that open or do not close at the small door, and turn to the little one, and guard against the nerves; and correct so much blood as you see, and then release the ligament, and put on cotton and keep it tight; she is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	of suction wounds
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Suction wounds are made of thorns, or of iron, or of glass; and suction is done in two ways: either by pricking and drawing blood, or without pricking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this suction without pricking is done in two ways: either at all fire, or without fire; and suction done by pricking and drawing blood is done in twelve places on the body, of which one is completely on the chest; and the others are behind the neck; and the other two are on both sides of the neck; and the suction below the chin; and the suction on both shoulders; and the suction above the heels; and the suction on both arms; and the suction on both legs; and the suction on both ankles; and the suction does not treat blood, only small veins that are scattered in the body, and for this it does not weaken anyone, as is done with the treatment of a vein; and it should not be administered at all fire or without fire, in any disease due to repletion, until the whole body is drained.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	If necessary for diseases, it is recommended to ventose, or by customs, to anesthetize every hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and every time; for there are some who, when they have the need to ventose, have heavy breathing; and some who feel repletion and heaviness in their face, and in their head, and at their neck; and some who feel a drop of blood in their mouth, and have protruded their tongue, and reach for blood; and there are some who sing, and see through blood and mucous and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	When we see these signs, and especially when it is in the month of May, we order them to fast after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The fasting of the mind helps with the headache … that comes from the eyes, and it should only be done after the evacuation of all the blood; and this fasting is in the place of the fasting of the cephalic, and it should only be used by those who are of cold complexion or who have diarrhea, because this does great harm; and for this reason it should not be used by those who are awake or who have other cold diseases.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who often have this, become forgetful, and for that reason, it is necessary to place the vacuum a little more below due to the doubt of forgetfulness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The vacuum on the neck is in place of the sinus and the basilica, and for this reason, it is necessary to place it at the narrowest point, and to pierce the promontory of the channel, and to all, and to replenish; and it should be placed a little, because if it is held too tightly, it causes forgetfulness or stomach and heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The vacuum on the II costelz of the neck is necessary for headaches, and obtunding and emigration, and strangulation, and pain at the roots of the teeth, and it is in place of the sinus of the basilica; and it is necessary to command the saint to express his hand when placing it, that he does not compress the artery, and does not cause the evacuation of blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	The ventilations of the neck are useful for diseases of the mouth, and decay of teeth, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the remedies of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The ventilations of the shoulders are useful for diseases that come from heat and overfilling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The ventilations of the elbows are as useful as three veins of the arm, for they draw blood from these large veins; and commands the healer not to pierce too deeply, for the skin is bare of flesh, and knows of nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The vacuum that is on the back should be used to remove swellings from the base, and for diseases of the spine, and it should be a large, metal one, that can draw well; and by chance, if it is too thin, it might break; and I cause great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The vacuums of the legs heal openly, because they draw blood from all over the body, and are good for old pains of the joints, and of the bones, and of the bladder, and remove swellings; and they are in the knees, and in the ankles, and everywhere they weaken the body after long use, and bring on fainting in many conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The method of applying the vacuum is that you first apply it empty and quickly succeed, then press it firmly and move it evenly, and do not stop doing this until you see the liver red and swollen, and appear the flow of blood; then stop, and replace the vacuums, and take care in the position of the body, for there are such people who have tender flesh and clear skin: it is necessary to strike once only, and it is necessary to make wide wounds and a deep one; and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the wound is large, it is necessary to strike twice: the first time to finely puncture the path of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the bone is very sharp, then you must strike it a third time; and when we wish to draw out the arrow little by little, we should only do it once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we wish to draw out much blood, we should often recommend it; and if the bone is not sharp, then strike it in front, and the end should be perceived firmly, and it is suitable for those who have thick skin and are rough, that you rub the legs of the suction cups with an appetizing and dissolving oil: if it is in summer, with violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil; and if it is in winter, with pennyroyal, lavender, camomile, or another similar one.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is large and cold, take oil of tamarisk, or balm, or aniseed oil, and similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the person who is to be treated with a hot bath and wide pores, then one should not put any oil, but it should be washed after the vaporization of high rose water, or high cold water, or marjoram water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or other similar things.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have much moisture, if they rise from ash, or high mint water, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	Those who have excessive swellings rise from old wine, or from sour wine, or from the decoction of anise or chamomile, or from other similar things; and they should not immediately be purged after the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two; and they should not sleep immediately after ventosation, and it is good that they sweat, when they should be ventosed and when they are being ventosed.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And if those who are being purged are feverish, and if they are not too weak and inflamed; then it is good that they take cold things, such as large green apples and endives and leeks at the sauce, and similar things; and they should drink watered mustard, and cinnamon and cloves, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And those who have a cold constitution should take honey syrup, and aromatic wine between old and new, and a little mustard, and small pinch of peppercorns and pigeons; and the day that they are about to vomit, they should drink more than they eat; and it is appropriate to give some men three or muscat grapes before or after vomiting, to strengthen the main members; and the subtle ones should not drink, but only those who are strong.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The suction cups that are placed on the body to relieve pain are those that are placed on the liver, and on the spleen, and podagra, and on the belly and the buttocks, and the thighs, because these members do not suffer much from being touched, and no one does this except to draw blood from one member to another, as we place suction cups on the breasts when the child is born; to remove the viscosity that is in the member, as we place suction cups on the belly and on the buttocks to soothe the member; and remove pain, when there is an abscess or a stone, if by its attractive power it removes the abscess, or dislodges the stone from its place; and thus it is done when placed on the liver and on the spleen when there is retained viscosity, and these suction cups are administered empty for sweat alone; and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes with hot water, as in diseases of the chest, and in such a way that one fills the suction cup with hot boiling water, or hot water where there are harmful herbs.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the vacuum administered by fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And it should have two wide and half-palm-sized openings and a small puncture in the middle, as to put a needle, and it should be of tin, or sulfur before it does not burn the hairs when placing it on the limb; and it should have in the middle a thin rod of tin or iron, to place a candle, and they should be large and small according to the diseases and age of those who take them; for the vacuums of children are different from those of adults, and of the weak from the strong.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And one should place this suction cup on the limb: take the wax or iron rod, and put it through the suction cup's tube, so that it clarifies at the bottom of the suction cup that it does not burn the hairs; then put it on the limb, and you should do so on the part that we have mentioned, so that when one wants to, if there is vapor, and remove the suction cup; and take the iron rod as before, and repeat often, if you have the skill.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the suction cup that is used in the disease of pleurisy, there is no tube or nipple, and it is not administered until it is full of vapor, and it is placed on the limb alone; and this is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Sansues are not suitable for treatment except in members where it is impossible to place suction due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar things; and in similar members, such as teeth and nostrils, and others like them; and the quality of the user is that when you remove sansues that are in shallow waters without pressure, take; and put them in shallow water, as long as they are familiar, and have nothing in their bellies; and then cleanse with blood and suction, then rub the member until it is red, and put the sansues on; and when they are flat and blackened, if it is a place where suction can be placed, place it, for this is very helpful.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If not, first raise the limb from the wrist, and then from the elbow, very well, and then wipe it; and if the wound is too large after the course of the sinews, then dip a cloth in cold linseed oil, and place it on top, until the sinews are cleansed; and if the sinews multiply, then place vitriol or salts on top, and similar things, until they are cleansed; or you place half-peeled beans on the wound, and leave them until they stick to the limb, and now it will stop bleeding; and if you have more serious wounds, take other bandages.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	If the snakes refuse to take, rub the wound with fresh blood, or you place a needle until the snake bites, and then place them on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will die; and when you see that they are dying, powder with a little aloe and ground silk, or ashes, so they will now be gone.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	This begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Be aware, dear son, that the foolish people of this chapter have never seen any of the old books, nor have they read any letters; and for this reason the science is hidden in our land, because I found none good; and I know nothing, except by the science of the old books, which I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and by experiment, and by the custom of my life; and I have described in this chapter what is contained, and have abbreviated it at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are needed, as I have done in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, we should say or prologue of this book the sums of the word and the chapters where the wise put his understanding, and stay on the truth, so that those who are experienced seek and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twist or wound comes to any part, it is necessary to treat the injury on one side and the other, if nothing happens, such as weakness of the body, or children, or the elderly; or if the wound is not very clean, or too cold; and to use hot cholz, that is to say, hot jute and kidney, and do not drink wine, and do not change any fatty charcuterie, and do not fill oneself too much with meat that fills the veins with blood, until you have no doubt of an abscess, or spread of matter in the member; if the injury returns to its previous government as it has used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary to apply a thick mash of meat that causes swelling, such as cooked wheat, and risotto, and tests, and fish, and chicken, and eggs, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For the mash should be applied frequently and soon after the break.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that broken bones of the elderly and infirm do not heal well or mend according to their nature due to the weakness of the limbs, nor those who are too tender, such as the bones of small children; but do not worry, reset and join the bone together with large strong ones that hold and support the member together, until it is enforced so much as it was before; and not entirely of its own work, and for this reason it is necessary to apply a thick mash of meat, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And the fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot, and I will tell you all the ways of fracture in this chapter.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a fracture that goes through the spine, and another in soaking, like the tip of a quill for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture in a small cut.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And each kind has its own method and proper tool in restoration, according to what memory comes in the limb; and fracture of bone is known by the bone being twisted, and open widely by itself, and pressing against the palm; and when there is no crookedness or touching, and the pains are not great, if there is no fracture; but it can still have crookedness, or cut, or small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	It is not necessary that you move it by hand, but place the remedies that come here after, and then gently restrain it now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And if the broken part that was in the arm, and the two parts are disjointed, you must now put them evenly, as long as pus comes out; and if pus thickens and comes, do not let any scar remain until the pus is calmed; then set it lightly and carefully, and if the restoration of this is lighter than the restoration of that where there are pieces, then restrain it as it should be hereafter.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	If the bone is broken into pieces, if it is a hand or foot, or if it is small members, or to two strings, or to one string and your hand; and put the member according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the member broken are separated, you should gently move each addition in its place as you can, and guard that by your work not come the bad injury or pain; and well join the two bones according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel well in the hand if it seems to you that it is not quite right: if it cleans beautifully, and do not strain it too much, and do not press as those who bring by their work abscess and contraction to the member, as we have wanted many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the limb is at a point, well chastise the pain so it does not move, whether awake or asleep, turning or in any other way; and keep it securely so that the limb feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when it feels no pain, it is almost at a point, and it should be put in the right position so that it feels no pain; and guard that it is put correctly, so that twisting does not come when it is returned; and the quality of the limb broken is as I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	The quality of the limb broken is different in size and in greatness and in form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For there are small members, such as arms and legs and similar ones: if they are thin, cover them with thin linen cloths; and those that are thick, such as thighs and calves: if they are thick, wrap them in a wide and strong bandage, for the wide bands embrace the whole member evenly, and hold it evenly from all parts, so that there is no gap; then wrap lightly around three or four times according to the size of the member, and hold your hand a little on each bandage, then go above the break and hold it less than the break; then soften the bandage a little and little, until you grasp a large part of the healthy flesh, then take another bandage and return immediately above the broken part; then return to the part away from the break and hold it evenly, neither too hard nor too strongly, as we have said in the first paragraph above; then place between the bandages linen or cloth, as much as they are equal, then tie everything above a bend, and then put your well-made fingers on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is an abscess or boil, put something soothing on it to draw out the pus, and what removes the abscess, and leave it like that for some time; then apply compresses on it, and be made of a piece of cloth cut evenly, or of a stick used to make clips, or of palm leaves, and be shaped like this:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	But the compress that one puts on the wound should be slightly larger and wider than the others; and it should also be as long as the limb is small or large; then apply compresses as you did in the first layer, then tie them up with a thread evenly, as you did in the first layer over the wound; the tighter they are, the less; and it should be that the threads are medium, not too thick or too thin, and be made of linen; for if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the works of those who make their bandages from twisted linen ropes, and this is a great error, because the bandage cannot be even if it is too fine, and it should only have about two fingers' space between each compress.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the wounds are closed by the thorns after the straining in their place, put discharge from them with linen, or other clean cloth, so that it does not fester.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the splinter, and the stitches are broken, I will tell you the treatment here after.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And do not strain all the broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the limbs are large, it is not necessary to put splints on them until after five or seven days, or more depending on your safety from abscess; and see the method of the ancient plasters for restoring fracture, dislocation, and torsion: and you should take flour that is kept in the walls of the mill, and mix it with a lot of egg, and use this mixture, not too thin or too thick, and it is the common method of the plaster restoring fracture at many positions, and especially to women and small children, because it is not too hard or too rough.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another way to apply plasters for fractures and dislocations and twists: take alabaster and ladanum and enulae and asefetida and Arabic gum and mugwort, an ounce each; wormwood and aloes, an ounce each; alechil eight ounces; and make a powder, and mix it with honey; if the patient's complexion is hot, use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and it will quickly heal broken bones, and it is worth many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another way to apply plasters for twists: take mugwort and valerian, an ounce each; wormwood and aloes, fourteen ounces; acaice six ounces; bolic armenic ten ounces, and grind it well, and mix it with vinegar or honey, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another method to treat joints and bones that are dislocated from their sockets, and to relieve the pain, and to use the tail of the bone, and the fracture: take a new bone, and moisten it in oil and cooked fat, and place it on the joint.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	This plaster does not heal immediately, but it is good for relieving abscesses and properly treating pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method to treat broken bones: take dried fig leaves and earthworms, grind them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another method to treat the break in the bone and to ease the remaining pain of the abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take the root of wormwood, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of each one in parts; and grind, and mix with wine, and if the limbs are cold, mix with moist or dry coriander seed, and use.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another method of treatment, more suitable than the first, when an abscess is difficult to restore the member.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take the roots of wormwood, linseed, balm, mint, and sage, and flowers of violets and chamomile, of all one part; grind, and mix with salt, or moist or dry coriander seed, according to the heat of the limb and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates said in his book that one should not put on a broken limb except for a plaster made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and said that it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems that Galen said that one should put on a broken limb to heal, dry things slightly warm, such as myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to bandage that is good for wounds and pain: take hair from the tail of a horse or feathers of an owl, and viscous substance and silk, and mix them evenly, and grind them, and make a bandage and put it on the wound.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then release it a little later, and be careful if the pain does not disappear, or if the bone of its joint does not move; then do not release it by force again. If the pain comes to the limb, or itching, without rest or inflammation, quickly release it, and remove the poultice now; and take light linen, and moist sea sponge, and plunge in hot water, and lift the limb until the itching ceases, and soothe the pain; then let the member rest for an hour, then put on dry linen, moistened with hot oil or rose oil, and tie with a nut, as long as you are sure of no abscess forming; and relieve the inflammation of the limb, and soothe the pain, then begin the subtle bandage again, and a little poultice, and do not strain it as much as before; subtly until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is red and swollen and painful and inflamed, and you have knowledge of plasters and ointments, then apply them evenly as you did before.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	And if it does not come to the limb within three or four or five or seven days, and you leave it for twenty days, as we see, until the breaker is aware, and approaches the joint above; then restrain it more than before, and increase its flesh, as I said before; and if you see that the limb is dryer than necessary, scrape it with sharp hot tongs every time you apply it, and this every hour, and loosen the bandage a little; by this method then the necrosis is stopped in the limb, and it is healed quickly, unlike what the foolish people do, who cause great pain to the limb: this is bad, and if it is done improperly, I see nothing else but weakness and working incorrectly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various ways of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	There are many ways of breaking, and various figures, and the causes are distinguished; for there are breaks that are made by the percussion of a sword, and the collar bone completely breaks the bone just below it which is outside the bone, as if it were cut or broken; and for this reason this kind of break is called «haichure».
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	Or the sword cuts through the bone from above in a piercing manner, and this kind of break is called «absolute»; and it is the wound of these two breaks, great or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is percussion from a fall, or a cut from a sword, or a break from a fall on stone, or from falling onto something else, and similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if it is a broken bone that pierces through the skin, approaching the flesh on either side of the bone, or above the bone, and this wound is large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if the wound that is set into the bone as thin as a hair, and the fracture is small, and because of this it is called "capillary" fracture; and if the wound made by being struck by an arrow, or falling, or something similar, and makes the piece of the bone enter below, and the threads are like those of a hat when they are sewn together; then the arrow enters inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And it happens more often in those who have or are mostly moist bones, such as children; and they have all these ways of fracture that small pieces are displaced like these; and I will speak about this in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all ways of fractures by the displacement above them, and the inspection of tents, and by the rotten char that is above.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The similarity of hair is known because when one has revealed the bone, and one rubs it above, if there is an open black fracture.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of fracture, be careful about the bad accident, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, and loss of understanding, and extension, and paleness, and fever ague, and the eyes issuing forth and turning red, and other similar things in many dispositions, it cannot be healed without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see any apparent injury, and you hope for recovery, then begin treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the broken bone comes first to you, and it is in the leg, then you must remove the bone before the fourteenth day or you will not be able to.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in the arm, then you must remove the bone before the seventh day, provided that the flesh around the bone has not decayed, and the injury that we have mentioned occurs.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the broken piece of bone comes close to the skin that covers the brain, then it is necessary to cut away the part that is wounded in all ways that you can, and over the shape of the wound more smoothly than you can, and when blood comes out when revealing the bone, or an abscess forms, help with what is necessary, and it is necessary to fill the wound with linen cloths soaked in rose oil; and let the wound rest until the abscess is calmed down, and be sure that no blood comes out; then begin around the bone to remove, and this is done according to two methods of craft: one method is that you cut narrowly in front, and this is the form.
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	Then use another cut larger than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method is that you have several cuts of different sizes, some narrow and some wide, and they are sharp and made of iron, and work lightly, so as not to injure the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And if the tooth is very hard and outside, it is necessary that you pierce around it, as long as you administer cuts with drills, not before it goes through the test, and it should have above the point a margin or circle, which does not let the point pass beyond the bone; and you should have several, so that each one comes in its own place of the edge of the bone, so that you have drills for all teeth; and this is the form of the three methods of drills:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	To perform a fire cauterization through the bone, you should place the iron on the bone, and turn it back to your two hands until you know that the bone is pierced; then remove the iron on another part slightly later, and so do all around, then cover the incisions the space of the bone between the teeth, and do it as subtly as you can, and clearly, as we have said, until you remove the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments that you have as forceps, pincers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the sinus.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have pierced and treated the bone, it is advisable to close the opening that remains in the bone with another instrument similar to an incision, but it should be more tenacious and more subtle than the other incision; and if there remain any small bones or scales, remove them gently with the instruments; then treat the wound with tents and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other method of work is such that the Galians call it, which is much better; and they say it is very good.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first to remove a part of the bone where the fracture is open, so that when you have removed that part, then place the lens-shaped piece of this incision, which is the shape:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one part, and it is the piece of that side, so that the cutter is towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer on top, so that you lightly cut the bone all around, and be careful of the thread that is outside; if it is against the bone, then lightly cut the bone, because one cuts it well without harming, and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the fracture of the bone does not pierce through the skin, and the bone is only broken on one side, and there are small pieces, then you should smooth that roughness, and remove the scales with a thin razor that you should have in various quantities, to manage each limb as conveniently as possible, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you have large razors before, and then more subtle ones, and do not stop doing this until it is well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other hair clippers and subtle fractures, you should manage it according to its progression; and this is a thing that is not repeated by him who has put his study in this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	If the wound is exposed, it is necessary to apply a strip of linen according to the size of the wound, and moisten it with rose oil, and place it on the wound; then take another strip doubled in two or three, and moisten it with wine and rose oil, and place it on top of the first strip; and do this more lightly than you can, so as not to irritate the wound, then administer by pouring over an additional layer of linen, and do not strain it until it stains the wound only; leave it in this way for one or two days, until the abscess is relieved, then remove it, and administer medicines such as lis roots, flour of vegetables, frankincense powder, aristolochia, and similar things; and from these things make a powder, and place it on the wound, and administer additional medicines without biting; and keep the wound clean, so that you do not leave any tissue or pus, because when pus accumulates on the skin, it causes the skin to rot and it hurts greatly.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take precautions therefore, as no accidents come to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful with doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if no other remedy comes to the patient, which has virtue, it is necessary that you apply a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and a cloth, and put it on the wound; then cure with methods of cures as it is appropriate, until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Be careful that the two bones of the shoulder are not broken, or one by itself, because they are two bones; and that one is cartilaginous, and does not break unless it is twisted or dislocated, and then it is healed.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, it is necessary that you break your small nail or needle at the tip of your finger, and place the broken part inside your index finger, and in the palm by default, until the bone regains its natural shape; and do this lightly, and keep in mind that the pain should not be felt through your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the upper part of the bone, and cannot reach your finger, it is necessary that you place it at the top of a small stick or a slightly thick one.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the break is in both parts, make another one, and hasten to restore the first joint, if you can; if not, after the seventh or eighth day, when the swelling of the wound has subsided, then place at the top of your finger tents of linen cloth, if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	When you are on the other side, where the fracture is; and the tents should be so large that they fill the holes of the nose.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And they said no one should mash the tents in the fire, and each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	It does not seem to me that this is good, but it should be mashed in the making of an ointment with honey and powder of mollusk; then leave the tent until the bone is hard, and the cartilages are hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And never use feathers in place of tents, and if you have a soft cloth around, and hold the fracture, and blow the pains through it; now do what you see.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if abscesses come to the nose while you work, put clay or a cotton ball soaked in red wine or a little hydrogen peroxide on it.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If abscesses do not come to the nose, put a poultice of wheat flour and incense powder mixed with egg yolk on it, then put light cloths over it and do not tie the nose tight; if the broken piece of the nose is small and broken into smaller pieces, remove them with suitable instruments, then cut the wound, and treat other injuries as appropriate, and bandage it with appropriate emplastrums and ointments, and if there is no wound in the nose, treat it with tents and put cold compresses on it until it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	of the fracture of the jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is fractured and there is no wound elsewhere, and the fracture is only slight, and not completely broken into two pieces, as can be seen if one looks carefully.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is necessary, if the fracture is on the right side, to push your index finger into the mouth of the patient; and if the fracture is on the left side, to push your index finger from the right hand, and gently push the fracture inwards, and hold it with the other hand by default, and make it even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the jaw is in two pieces, it is necessary that you administer traction of two parts, until it is even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if the movement of the teeth avails, or breaking, then strain them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then place it over the broken jaw, and place it over one double cloth; and place over the cloth a great well-made bandage, or a piece of leather even and wide according to the jaw, and tie it to the muscle that you can, and command the patient not to move, and feed them with light food.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	If you see that the figure changes, remove it from the patient and then put it back in place; and apply a poultice on top, of flour from the mill with plenty of urine or semolina flour, after having removed the crust; and apply the poultice again lightly, and if the poultice sticks, leave it until it is healed; often healed in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if an abscess comes, follow what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, bandage carefully with any piece of the bone that is broken off; so gently as to avoid further damage.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	If the wound is narrow, then enlarge it according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces, and there is none left, if the wound is wide, then apply wound dressings to it, to drain pus until it is healed.
de la forcele	of the forearm
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The forearm is broken several times in front and behind the shoulder, and the fracture occurs in three ways: either it is broken and dislocated into two pieces, and there are fragments, and it is the least heavy to restore; or there is a fracture with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And when the fracture is in the presence of a wound, you should have two ministers, one to apply the splint that covers the broken bone; and the other to extend the neck towards the affected part; then set the fracture equally on both sides, so that it forms as it should, without any appearance or movement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend further, place a rounded ball of cloth or linen, and as large as your need; extend and support the broken bone, and hold the ball in your hand, so that you set the fracture equally.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the shoulder of the arm out, because it comes from above, then it is necessary that the hairs be pulled evenly over its surface, and move the shoulder outwards, and bend the minister's elbow down, until the bone of the arm is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then apply the fracture to your two hands, and if you find the broken pieces, it is necessary that you make them join; and gently pick up the pieces, and if the bone cannot be joined for any reason, then use one of the instruments you have; but put the instrument away from the arm, to guard against infection:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	It seems like a spoon, and is not tightly closed, and should be as wide as it needs to be, according to the size of the bone and the skill of the work; and it has two prongs, if you see, and one is wide and the other narrow, like the edge of the wound that you made when you treated the bones; and when you are sure of an abscess, if the wound is large, or you doubt an abscess, then use the wound with cloths and tents, according to its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if an abscess comes, if it is soft, then soak the cloth in rose oil and in vinegar and in wine, and put it on.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The application of the bone, when it is in pain and in position, is that you place the plaster of the mill powder and an additional doughnut on the bone, and put light bandages on, and place a sphere outside the joint, if you have the skill; then take a very large bandage of one palm wide, then double the cloth over the bandage and the plaster; then take a thin staff of three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the large bandage, so that the head of the bandage is hanging down; and place the staff on the breaker, and turn the bandage over the neck, and outside the joint, and outside the bad joint; and bandage each part, and when you see that the limb holds the breaker evenly, and you see clearly that the staff does not move over the broken bone, reward every day, and when the joint is released, restrain it; and place the bad side on his back, and put a small bandage outside the joint, to raise the dislocation in the shoulder; if it aligns the force of the arm by the alignment of the shoulder, or you tie the arm to the neck, and do not release it unless something bad happens, for up to 20 days; then restart the plaster, if you see that there is a need, and bind and leave it as long as it is restored; and it is restored in the most 28 days, and less to some men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the shoulder fracture
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	It rarely happens that the shoulder breaks or is out of its place, and it only heals by touch; then according to the figure of the fracture, and the bone is placed back in its natural form, in all ways you can; then put powder from the mill with abundant oil on the bone, and light bandages, and put a double cloth over it; then put a wide but thin board, a bit wider than the shoulder, and if the board touches any part of the shoulder, use a strip of linen to make the board even; and then tightly wrap it around everything with a strong bandage, so that the board does not move from its place, and watch the joint every day; and every time it breaks, tighten and put the board back in its place if it is off, and ease the pains on its side; and the shoulder is restored in 20 or 30 days, And when these numbers are completed, remove and be careful, for this is not bone that heals quickly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone is torn off before the wound is opened, and not removed from the surrounding area, then cut through it, and the bone, and do what we have said in the breaking of the splint to alleviate an abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	of the breaking of the splint
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The bone is never broken in the middle, but this rarely happens; but it often breaks at the end.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, it declines towards the outside, and the patient feels great pain, and lack of movement, and everything, and possibly vomits blood, and the wound opens in the broken bone, and the smell is bad.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that the hairs lie silently above their backs, and the metal between the shoulders, then press the shoulders, and gather the ribs of the two ribcages in your hands, and subtly put them evenly in all the ways you can, until the shape of the bone is as it should be; then put on plasters and poultices above the spine with salt or other light material, and wrap it in a cloth, and tie it to the broken bone so it does not move; and turn the limb gently to the back, and gradually tighten, and every hour massage the limb, and if it moves, tighten; and if it is necessary to release, for corrosion or for itching that comes to the skin, or pain or abscess, then hurry, and release it, and clean the plaster, and address what has come from methods of treatment; then reset the plaster, and tighten it until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	of rib fractures
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	The fractures of the ribs come only from great blows on the back and at the top, and they do not break unless because they are sharp; and the pain is felt well during the examination of them.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the remedies are that you set the fracture as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	Then apply the plaster and the bandage of a splint if you know how to do it.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the fracture of the ribs is inclined inward, it causes great pain and tenderness, as if from a pleurisy, because the ribs do not touch the skin; and they must be pressed, and everything else, and there is much bleeding of blood, and this is a difficult sickness, and the ancients have taken great care.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if among those who say that it is necessary to administer foods that swell the stomach, to push the broken bone into place.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not make this mistake, if pus does not come, unless it comes.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come, then cleanse it.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they said that among those who put suction cups on the limb, for draining well, and this is reasonable; nevertheless, doubt and there is where the suction cup does not attract the excess from the limb due to its weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they said that among those who must cover the limb with linen oiled high, and one puts tents between the ribs to keep the lung evenly inside, then treat the care of pleurisy, food, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the pain is great that he cannot bear it through the bone that does not touch the skin, and there is doubt, then you must cut across the broken ribs on the side, and you must place an instrument to protect the wound; and then you must saw the bone, and gently pull, and then stitch the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and treat it with plasters, until they are healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes to the skin, then place moistened cloths on it in rose oil, and put on the affected area; and treat while the skin of what is needed for the abscess, and lie quietly nearby until it is healed.
de la brisure dou col	of the broken neck bone
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	No time comes when a breaker breaks the neck bones, and there is hardly any pain; and similarly at the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to anyone, and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, if you see their hands softened and swollen and dead, and they cannot move or extend them, and when you touch them with a needle, they do not feel.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	It is fatal in many conditions, and if they move and feel well when you hold them and do not, it means that the bone joint is saved, and the pain has been cured, if you put care on it.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if a similar thing comes to the spine in the back, and you see if it is healthy or not, if it holds still with soft feet, and if the accidents that are in hand are those that are on the back, and above the back there is ventosity and involuntary excretion; and when it is placed on its belly, if there is involuntary excretion.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when it is placed on its back and it wants to sit up, it cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	It is deadly: do not labor in its care.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come to it, it is the lighter thing.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the care is such that you reward if there is an abscess clean, put on the spine oil of rose or goose fat, as long as it is calmed; then put on one of the healing plasters and drying, and bind with a bandage, and command the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where you feel the pain, until it is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is dry, it is necessary to cover it with the cure; then remove the bone, then assemble the two lips of the wound, if it is large, at a seam, then treat the wound with an ointment rubbing charcoal, as long as it is healed; and if the patient's bone is broken, which is called the "bone of the cow", if you have a bottle of your right hand, and put it even on the other hand to your power, then put the plaster and the bandage over, if you have the skill; then tighten, and if there is dry bone, do it again, and remove, and treat the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the ribs of the back
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	It rarely happens that the ribs of the back are fractured, and if it does happen, it is not much different from a slight dislocation; making it long, and declining to the side, and coming to the shoulder, causing great pain, swelling, and inflammation where the bone is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand over it, as far as you can reach the fractured part; and remove any fragments of the broken bone, and restore its shape; and if the fracture is only at the top, then keep it in place until it is restored to its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	If the fracture is long or it inclines towards the inside, place the injured limb on its belly until the healing of this fracture is complete.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	When you have placed it in position, apply the poultice, then place it on a splint of wood or cloth, and hold the fracture so it does not move; and bandage the limb along the sides, until the fracture is straightened.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	Instruct the patient to lie on their uninjured side or back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	If an abscess forms and comes out, do not touch it until the abscess is soothed, and follow the method we have previously mentioned; then return to the healing process, and hold it as it should be, if there is no bad event; and this is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the shoulder dislocation
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The adjutoire is what is between the neck and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, one should restore it according to one of the two methods: one of which is that you take a smooth bone, according to this form:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie the two bones together, and raise them up, and saw the misaligned part above the seat; then pour some brine on the broken bone, as much as it can bear, and put a hook of wood on it, then place something heavy or the assistant extends it downwards; then put the broken pieces together with their hands together, until the broken one returns as it should be.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other way is to place the dislocation above its shoulder, and hold the hand on its collar, then command two ministers that one ties what is above the breaker at his hands, and the other ties behind everything, and stretches each to its part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is too far, then hold the rope outside the breaker, above the breaker, and stretch each of the ministers to its part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the breaker is close to the top of the shoulder, then it is necessary to place the rope outside the armpit, and the other towards the back, outside the breaker; and similarly, if the breaker is towards the back, it is necessary to place the rope gently, without labor, until the breaker is even above the shoulder, and above the back; then equalize the breakage, as it should be, and stretch it, if there are no signs of apostematous chaus.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	If an abscess arises and comes, if it is not restrained for seven days, and put in a poultice of mold and rose oil, until the abscess is soothed; then restrain, and the manner of restraining is that you place the plaster on the broken part, then bring the arm up with the assistance, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the chest; and bandage, and restrain with the assistance, and on the arm, so that the arm is in its place, unless something prevents it, or if the bone does not move.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	If you doubt that the bone does not move, use splints, and place a wider and stronger splint on the fracture, and have two inches of space between each splint, and let each splint be so large that it passes the fracture three fingers on each side; then strain against the splints, as I said at the beginning of this chapter over the fracture, more strongly and less distant.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	If you see the position of the splints and the strain, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the abscess is healed, let it lie for seven days, as we have said; then look at the joint every three days, that it does not prick or swell, or that the scarring does not come to the limb because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the dislocation, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such accidents occur within three hours or more, and the pain remains on his back, and his hands are on his stomach; and he puts a piece of linen cloth evenly across the injury, and looks every hour of the day or night, that the shape of the member does not move, or that the tendons are not softened; then the dislocation will be cured by the power of medicine, and give him the food we have already mentioned, in such a way that the food is at the first subtle; and when he begins to recover, it should be thick.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	It is customary that the dislocation and the leg should be reset in 40 hours after everything; and then one should apply and administer warm water and medicines of ointments to the limb to promote healing.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	If its structure is crooked and swollen, it may take 1 or 2 months to reset.
de la brisure du bras	of the broken arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, called the "forearm," which are small, and it is this one that forms the cavity; and the other is large, and it is this one that is outside, towards the little one; perhaps the large forearm breaks alone, or the small one, and perhaps both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When small bones are broken, the healing is light, and the cure; and when large bones are broken, the healing is difficult, and more painful than when they are broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is only the small bones that are broken, then it is necessary to extend them slightly and align them evenly.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it is the large bones, then it is necessary to pull them more forcefully; and extend them over the cushion, and tie the hand at a higher level than the other fingers, and the small fingers lower than the others, and so that the joints cross over themselves, and the cushion in front of them higher, so that the joints do not suffer any labor; then extend the assistants to the part away from their hand, or to the elbow, and other assistants above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then set the mirror evenly, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if it breaks into pieces, put each in its place, and if there is no piece that can be held, and you cannot restore it to its place, then do as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the broken piece there is a wound, I have spoken of it to the chapter's master; take care of it.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if in the beginning of the restoration there is an abscess, then use the poultice made of rose oil and white wax, which is not too hard or too soft; and tie the poultice gently, until the abscess is relieved.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	Then remove the crust, and apply the powder from the mill with plenty of urine, then place the splints, and set the splint of the broken bone closer than the others, and a bit wider than the others; and make sure it has six splints or more: whether the broken bone is in one of the bones, or in two; and hold it higher than the broken bone than any other part, and always less in removing, as I said at the beginning of this chapter; and let the cloths that are above the broken bone be soft and moist, and not too hard or rough; and let the thread, which is used to tie it, be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	Reward the limb and the joint after some time.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	If any misfortune comes to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, then you must raise the limb in hot water for as long as those itches are soothed; and let the limb rest without being too tightly bound.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	Then continue the strapping, and if the joint is dislocated and the bones are broken, or similar things, then address it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the swelling cannot come to the limb because it is too tight, then you must soften it a little, and let it rest for some time, until the swelling has passed, and then strap it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things we have said come to harm, then let it wait for 20 days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	Or if it is within the body, then put your hands on its neck, and make its neck even, and guard against movement and digestion, and sleep on its back; and after 30 or 35 days, or perhaps 20 days, depending on the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the broken hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	After the back of the hand and to us there are few breaks, and it only happens many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	And when the plantar surface of the hand is broken or injured, it is necessary that the painful parts be straightened and aligned correctly; then put your hand on the extended palm, and extend the healer's broken bones, and place them evenly with the other, until they are well joined; and apply the plaster and bandages, if there are no wounds, then put a splint according to the size of the limb; and it should be wrapped in a linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the bone is broken in the peroneal region of the plantar arch, make a bandage of cloth, and instruct the patient to wrap it around his broken foot; then stretch it into a long strip, and let it be as wide as the plantar arch of the hand, and stretch it, as it should be.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the bone is broken in the posterior region, it is necessary to place a splint above and another below in the foot, so that the hand is open and straight, then tie it all around the hand, and stabilize the joint between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the broken bone comes to any of the two digits, whether it is the pinky or another, it should be aligned as needed; then wrap it with the plantar arch, and if you see that you need to place a straight small splint to lift the broken bone and not move it; and if the broken bone is in other fingers, such as the index or another, align it as needed, and the joint with the healthy finger next to it; or you can hold them all together, which is better, or you can place a splint above, as appropriate; and take care of restoration and joint positioning, and treat what comes to it, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken rib
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	The ribs of the rib are often broken, and one can see it when they return in front and behind; and its restoration is that one puts the bone above the broken part, and the other outside.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the hairs are cut off from its face, then each assistant stretches his part equally; and this is when the break is put in place of the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the break is close to the root of the rib, then one of the ribs towards the base, and the other ribs outside the broken part.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if it is close to the kidneys, and then one of the ribs above the kidneys, and the other ribs below the broken part. Then put the mirror the bone equal to its two hands, as long as it is according to its natural shape, and then put the plaster, and the bandage, unless there comes a swelling.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is an abscess that has opened, let it calm down then return to your work and your treatment; the matter is done in a similar manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary to wrap the broken bone with a double or triple layer of cloth, and let the excess remain; then bend the leg until the heel reaches the base of the knee, and tie a long piece of cloth between the thigh and the leg, below the knee joint, and bring the upper end of the cloth to the top; then bend the cloth over the leg and the thigh, and place the bandage on the broken bone; then put a bandage on the leg bone; then fill the space between the leg and the thigh with soft cloth to equalize the tension, then begin to bind it in three or four layers above the broken bone; and as you go higher than the broken bone, and less tightly; then examine the two pieces of cloth that you have tied between the leg and the thigh, and the three bandages that are above, then return to the top of the cloth, until you reach below the knee joint; and if it does not move from its place, then let it remain thus, so that there is no abscess or swelling of any kind.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it is dislocated, then release it, and put it back as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that can be felt, then it should be set, if possible; and if not, then it must be broken, and pulled straight; and the cure as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And never break the ribs in this way, as in the dislocation and shoulder; however, in the restoration made thus does not hurt the bones.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And it is important that the ribs are restored at different times, according to the diversity of constitutions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the road of the gentleman
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	It is said that on the road of the gentleman there is little breakage, but it rains many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, it is only a crack or a puncture, and it has to all wounds, and without wound, and this feels very bad.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that one puts what is broken back together as much as possible; then put the plaster, and if you have the skill, put a round bandage, and hold it as it should be, then reward all the preparations that we have said in other broken things, such as abscess and similar; then put to each accident what is necessary until it is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the broken leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	It is said that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is called "mustelz" on the right, and the other is called "foscile"; and all the other fractures are as they come to the arm, and for this reason the restoration is like that of the equal arm, and the work is all there. And if both bones are broken together, then the leg returns to all its parts.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the small bones are broken, then it returns in front.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bone is broken, then it causes great pain, and one can see it well; and it returns outside.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Therefore, apply gentle traction, and make it even, and tie the fractures equally; however, if there is a break and it is ugly, and there are many pieces, then the traction should be less and lighter; and the alignment according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, take two strips of cloth that bind the leg on one side and the other, and be long enough to go from the knee to the ankle; then wrap them around and tie them in the middle, and at this point it will not allow the leg to bend to the right or left, and thus it is good; and no one administers the long strips of cloth, and if it is made properly, and correctly place the leg in a splint to prevent movement, and properly do this in the fracture where he has the wound; and move the leg every day to see if there is an abscess or other accident; until the cure is as healthy as possible.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the breaking of bones due to piers
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle, there is no breaking of bones, but in the case of piers, there is never breaking of bones and it is not necessary, and only a slight injury occurs in some cases.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there is breaking of bones due to piers, and you see these bones sticking out over each other, then put the foot on the ground, as if it wants to walk, and then place your foot where the bones are raised, then press them so much that they return to their place; then apply the ointment and bandage above, and put a small piece of cloth on the wound of the foot, then strap it to the foot evenly, then wrap dressings around, and other things that you have at hand.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, if the bone is released, you will find the bones even, whether they are broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there are any of the two broken, if you reset them as we have said for the two bones of the hand; then place a splint along the length of the bone, and make it slightly wider, then place the bandage as I have said, and strain evenly; and if there are two or three or more broken, place a splint according to their quantity, wrapped in a linen cloth, and strain the bandage away from the skin of the bone; and let it be above the head of the bone below the belly of the bone, so that it heals well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, as we have said; and treat each accident as it should be.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the finger bone
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bones of the woman are fractured, if the wound is enlarged, then incline it to the part of the back, and hold it from behind; then fill the wound with nature's cotton, and put in as much as possible; then lift the woman, and gradually raise her back, and when the cotton comes out of the wound, return the bone with the cotton; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, return it, and thus do this for seven days or so: then the fracture will be restored, and if you see, take a bladder of berries, and tie a cat to it, and blow all the berries into the wound; then blow into the cat in a form, until the bladder is empty inside: nature will restore the fracture; then fill it with cotton, and leave it thus for some days, until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the little finger of the hand is broken, or of the woman, if it is reset as we have said in the bone of the shoulder; and these fractures are not hidden to those who put their study and practice into it, and pay attention to my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the fracture means in many positions the right way of restoration: understand therefore.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the bone, when it is broken, take a goose quill and blow into the bone; then wrap it in cloths, and leave it for three days or so, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	of fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for one who has a fracture with a wound, even if it is large, such as the bones of the ribs or shoulder or similar, that they be cleansed immediately, so that the cleansings that we have mentioned bear witness.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is clean, and if the dressing of vinegar, if you have nothing else, then begin to restore the fractured bone in the same hour, or the next day, if there are no pus.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if pus comes, then leave the restoration until the next day, as long as the pus is abated, and do not touch it on the following day or quarter, for you would bring about bad accidents.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken teeth appear above the gum line, it is necessary that you gently place them in your hands, with slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension is not equipped to be placed evenly in your hands, use an iron tool with seven or eight inches of length, and its width depends on the size of the wound; and for this reason, it should have three or four prongs, according to how many it has in each treatment of broken bones; and it should be round and a bit thick, so that it does not pierce through the limb at your work, and it should be sharp behind, and wide in the middle in front, like this:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called "palainche", because the patient must have the broken bone placed above the head of the visible bone; and the splint is applied once, as long as it returns, and it should be even one against the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is subtle, and the splints cannot well hold the bone, then it is necessary to cut the head of the bone until the splints have hold.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot bring the bone back as we have said, then use a suitable tool for this purpose, such as a saw or a file, to your liking; then roughen and make small scratches on the bone that remains.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is returned to its place, and the pain is great afterwards, wait until it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	If you do this until it is in its natural place, then moisten the bandage with black stiptic wine, and properly if it has been open; and do not put anything else on the wound where there is oil, that it does not cause pus and corruption to come; then administer these things as you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover the covering all around, according to the quantity of the wound, and take care that the wound is not stretched with the break; and many times this has been done by fools, and they have caused pus or death or corruption at any time; and let the strain be softer and gentler than other breaks.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that no evil accident has occurred, as we have said, and you relieve the pain to the limb, if it does not require to be put on splints; but wrap around, in place of splints, hard cloths, and bind them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two hours that the wound is bleeding again, remove what you have put on top of all the blood, and apply healing ointment, such as Tetrapharmacum and similar.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you move the limb twice a day, in the morning and in the evening, as long as it is sound and healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limbs be arranged in such a way that the bow can move lightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if they continue to protrude, and it cannot be healed but remains bent, saw off the small pieces of bone, because it is necessary that you sew the wound with a tent, and remove all those unnecessary pieces that cause pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula comes to the limb, or in any other way of corruption, then it is necessary that you heal it, according to what it says in its chapter before.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken, and open above the limb, like the bones of the thigh or shoulder, and other similar large limbs, do not remove it, for many times death comes, but leave it until it can heal; perhaps it will fall out after 20 or 30 days, then cure the wound if you can; and if you cannot, leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of blows that come from the welding
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We often come after the healing of the broken bone, exactly at the joint, and it is a bad thing to see the misalignment of the limb; and perhaps it cannot do its natural workings.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Then if it is fresh, then administer stanching medicines such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocoll, acaice, and similar things, either one or all together, and mix them with stiffening wine or with abundant honey or with garlic; and place it on the wound in a cloth, and keep it tightly, and do not let it leak out later; then remove it, and start another, until the swelling is gone; or you can place a piece of plaster well made; because the property of the plaster is that it removes all the inflammation from the limbs; and if the swelling has already hardened like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, if the coping above, and making the superfluity apparent; or you can cut it with any knife until it is removed, and treat it until it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	a weak limb that is after the garrison
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone is restored, and it remains after the limbs are weak and subtle, there are many causes for this: one is because it was tied too tightly, and was not tied as it should have been; or because there were too many bandages, and could not come to the proper position of the limb; or because of too much swelling; or because of too great movements, not in its time; or because it has little blood in its body, so it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the pain less, and make the body tense, until the swelling is not multiplied in it; and administer a bath, and give joy and ease; then put poultice on the limb, so that the poultice attracts to the great swelling, and the swelling often of hot water, until the swelling goes to the limb; and returns to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	a twisted limb after healing
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limbs are twisted after healing, and the bones are broken open, and the shape of the limb is deformed, it does not matter if its natural appearance is lost: thus do not believe those who say that one must break the limb completely new, and many have done this in our land; and such practices are blamed, and great harm comes from it, and perhaps death; however, if the dislocations and twisting are fresh, it is necessary to apply hot water or softening herbs that are cooked, such as willow leaves, roots, and mellilot, and similar things; and make a mollifying poultice, such as good-quality honey, and take willow bark powder, and mix it with goose fat or sesame oil, and apply the poultice on top; or take figs, and grind them with linseed, and similar medicines that soothe the pain.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And never is it necessary to apply continuous and prolonged pressure with wet hands on the dislocation.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And allow movement in the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the twisting is awake and hard, like a stone, and it needs to be removed with iron, if it covers just above the bone, make a slight incision; and put on a bandage and care for the wound.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to none, it must now be returned against the grain.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if it is delayed, the shoulder swells, and if by chance it is reset to the bone where it is swollen, because it does not matter that it moves at the angle where it is swollen: many times it brings on spasms and other pains; however, when this happens, first soothe the injury, then leave it until the abscess is calmed; then raise the limb with hot water and oil, then gently reset it, and treat each member as the cure comes in its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on the dislocations of the shoulder joint from head to foot.
des mandibules	of the mandibles
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	It is rare that the mandibles are dislocated downwards, and the dislocations of both mandibles occur in two ways: either they are slightly displaced from their place and softened a little; or they are entirely dislocated, hanging down towards the chin, and covering the lips so that he cannot hold them open, nor can he close his mouth, and it wraps around his tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it often returns in many positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if she is whole and completed, it is necessary that you reset it quickly, and do not delay; and in such a way that the minister sterilizes the head of the dislocation, and puts the mirror into the pocket of one of her hands at the root of the jaw dislocation inside the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts; and the other hand be outside, to hold even; and command the dislocation to soften, its jaws, and move from all sides.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the mirror moves evenly, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if it is difficult to reset, especially if both jaws are involved, then raise the arms in hot water and oil, until they are lightly reset; do not delay the resetting, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are returned evenly, and the mouth of the painful tooth is well closed to soften, put a cloth moistened with a warm, hardened wax made from rosin and wax, then lightly bind it with the molten wax; let the painful teeth sleep on their backs, and their jaws being between two cushions, so that they do not move to the left or right, nor strive to chew, but take light food, until the pains are removed, and the jaws are healed; then change what they want lightly, and do not work much to open the mouth for eating and drinking, until the jaw is well healed and healthy.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two mandibles cannot be reset to their proper position within an hour, and they are not converted back to their original shape, then fevers and sweats become common, and possibly diarrhea, and possibly vomiting of clear fluid.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	And when you see this, then it is a sign of danger; and often those who have it die within fourteen days.
de la forcelle	of the forceps
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The forceps cannot be removed from the side without causing further damage, and it is not reset once dislocated, and one can feel it.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is such that the patient should lie on their back, and extend their arms; then press the affected part firmly with your palm, and it will return; then apply the plaster and bandage, and bind it; and the patient who is on the side cannot be dislocated; if not, and if it is dislocated once, then reset it as we have said; then apply the plaster and bandage, and bind it, and command the patient to rest until they are healed; and thus the patient with the dislocated shoulder is restored when it is healed from its injury.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	Three ways in which the shoulder is dislocated: one is that it dislocates at the part of the socket below; and the second is at the part of the elbow above; and sometimes dislocates at the part above, and this happens little; and does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, and does not dislocate inside for the nerves; and many times dislocates downwards towards the socket, especially to those who have little char, because to these it is difficult; to those who have enough char, it dislocates and returns quickly.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes happens to some people, a fracture or crushing, and the shoulder swells with an abscess, and they think it is dislocated by this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	Then you must examine it, until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And it is known that the dislocation is when it is below the shoulder, and it sets apart the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between them obvious differences; and you will find at the top of the shoulder a hollow, and below the shoulder, the top of the shoulder, like as if it were two bones; and the bad hand cannot reach its neck, nor move from any movements; and also, if it is dislocated above, it is not hidden, for you will see it clearly below; and this kind of dislocation is only to be reset, when it is new, or if there are pains in the joint.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the manner is that the minister lifts the hand of the injured person high, then places his fingers on the joint, and pulls the joint upward to the shoulder; and the minister lifts his hand, and extends it upward, putting it away; then it will come quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come as we have said earlier, then it is necessary that the injured part be soaked in hot water; and the minister should warm and soften and moisten it with a decoction of althea and fenugreek and melilot in hot water, and then soak the injured part on its back, and place a piece of cloth evenly, neither too soft nor too hard, under the joint, then place the foot of the injured person on the cloth, and lift the shoulder gently, and pull the hand of the injured person; and other ministers wet the head of the injured person, so that it does not move down; this shoulder is now all right, and you should see if the resetting is done as follows: and it is that you make sure that the person who is stronger than the injured part is directly opposite the costeit, and pull the shoulder away from the joint of the injured part, and lift the joint upward, so that the injured part hangs in the air; and other ministers take the hand of the injured person down towards the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the pain is too light, then with it nothing heavy can be done, and the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And the resetting is done in another way: and it is like this that one puts a long thin rope on the ground, where the injured can be held as if with a spear, but not too thick or too rough; then it is put away from the pain, but with cloth underneath, and the pain is kept at the long end of the staff; then his hand is stretched out on the other side, forming a shape, and the joint will return to its place quickly; and if he does not want to return for all these things that we have said, then do this cure: take a rope of two arms of great and four fingers wide, which has the head round to enter through the opening outside the shoulder, in this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then tie a soft cloth over the head where the dislocation is, which does not cause pain, then remove it from the dislocated area; extend one arm over the long one, and tie the helper over the dislocated area, and the other arm at the top of the shovel, then place your hand on the broad side of the shovel, and let your hands hang down, and let the body hang down on the other side: the joint is now healed.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when she is healed in any way, it is necessary to place a bandage of equal linen over the shoulder, then apply the poultice with powder from the mill, with incense and a little oil, over the entire shoulder and around, then remove the bandage from the shoulder evenly, and return the limb to the poultice, and embrace the hand at its neck, and let your hands remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he move it little, until the limb is comforted, for it will heal faster; and then move it again after five or seven days, and if it is stiff and cannot be moved, it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is very strong due to moisture that has come, or for other reasons, it is necessary that you administer cauteries at three points, as it is placed before or in the chapter on cauteries.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all of this, and it dislocates again after seven days, and the joint does not stay in place, and cannot raise the arm above, then cut the nerve at the top of the shoulder is torn or stretched or softened; and cut that the joint has never been fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that is by the wrist and the fingers, or behind, is caused by impact and stretching of the hands, and there is another remedy; and treat until they are healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing the limb swells and moves poorly, then apply the hairs many times, until that swelling is relieved, and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	That the shoulder joint is dislocated at points, and repeatedly dislocates; and it is dislocated from all parts, and even in front and behind, and the dislocation has not been remedied, as one can see and feel well; and it moves according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the misaligned ear with the healthy one, see it openly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is cut, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary to reset it as soon as possible when the shoulder comes, for if the shoulder comes, it would be painful to reset; and perhaps it cannot be reset at all, especially when it is in the back; it is better than other dislocations, but causes more great pain, and perhaps death comes.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is, when it is so that one can reset, that you extend your hand to their two hands; and their arms are spread, and their hands on either side of the ear, inside and outside, and push the joint back together, or at the root of their palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and holds the root of the palm that is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if he does not want to return to the place, give strong extension; and if two people extend the arm, and hold it with two people, so that it does not move at extension; then turn the arm from each part, then when you have wrapped a double long and wide cloth; and when you see the joint at the hand, if you have any oil to soften the joint, then press the joint together, as much as it returns; and when it is in place, put a dry plaster with some honey on top, and hold it firmly, and put the arm against the back of the bad shoulder, and leave it for some time, then remove it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firm in its place, release the ligament and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not hold well, restart the bandage and the ligament, and leave it thus for some time, until it is firmly placed; then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if he feels pain after the movement of the joint, and it moves, then bathe and rub him well, and press until it is soothed; or put a piece of fat mutton grease on the joint, leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and put in a bath; and when he sweats, rub the joint immediately, then put the grease back on, and put him in the bath again; and do this twice or three times until it is healthy; and if you see, then put some wet moistened with hot butter on, and strain it on; and it will return to its position.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The joint of the hand is dislocated, and the return is lighter than other joints. In any case, it should be quickly returned to its place in the same way as it was dislocated, whether the veins are swollen or there is an abscess present.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And the return is done by placing the hand wrongly on a table, and extending the fingers of the hand, and the mirror shows that the palm should be placed over the appearance of the joint, and the arm should be moved until it is back in place; then you should check if it is properly set; afterwards, place the hand wrongly on a table for extension and return.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, place the patient's hand on a table, and the other person places their hand over the appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, it is well. If not, apply the ointment of healing remedies and let it rest for a while before starting again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in place after some time, the joint will remain twisted; and do not put anything into the wound until the hand is clean, and nothing can be inserted at all: therefore cut the tendon or the artery; if there is no other method except to burn with a cauterizer over the case, and perhaps nothing else is suitable.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, put the poultice that we have said above, then strain and leave it for three days, then remove and leave it thus.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it cannot be moved well, and there is no swelling, then boil water and rub it until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of both hands
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Never dislocate both hands at once, never at the back of the palm or the belly; then hold the hand, and reset the dislocation to your pouch as it returns, then support the chief of the hand, and push it towards the part where it is disjointed; and leave it for three days, and then put it in place that day; and tie it, as we have said, and remove the bandage every day, and move it, and re-tie it; and do this often, until it is tight, and do the same if it is dislocated on the belly of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed; and do the same when it is dislocated in other parts.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	dislocation of the spine in the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spine in the back or neck is dislocated, and there are many dislocations, there is no cure, for the patient dies from the pain.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs are that the excretions jump out without volition, and cannot be held, and often the limbs are softened, or the two thighs or both arms or one; and often the spine moves at the back; this is called "gilbositez"; the cure is that you reward the gilbositez if it comes from childhood; if there is no cure or healing at all.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that which comes from falling or from impacts or from similar things, they said in the old ways of healing by great words, or it does not have much benefit; but I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and I have formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the case of the palsy which comes from the left side, there is no engineering or health; and also the one that comes directly to the second rib, and one cannot cure it other than that proper one which comes to the back, as I said; and it is that the limbs should be stretched out over its face in the first place, and have some strain away from him, so that he does not blister; then make one bandage at the head on the ground, and the other at the feet, and tie a bandage outside the tendons of the limb, and another at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles; and the assistant should fasten the bandages, one at the head and the others at the feet, among the two bandages; and they should be well tied, the bandage as we have said, and the hand puts its palms on the spine properly, until it regains.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	If it does not return with this treatment, take a table of three arms' length, and twist it away from the body, and place the painful side against the table, then place the middle of the table on the spine; and put the patient's feet on the other end of the table, and press firmly until it returns to its place; and if you see, do the same with the twisted one that turns to the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And you should fasten two ropes to the head of the painful arm of a person, and on the other side of the feet, and between each rope, outside and inside, one span of length; and in each rope, one button, or where the twisted one corrects, and let the ropes be firmly on the ground, so that they do not move; and between each two ropes, a rope turning, along with the twisted ones, and two small ropes of one span of length, to turn the twisted one; then tie the ligament between the tendons towards the head of the twisted one, and the other ligament towards the feet of the other twisted one, and each assistant turns his twisted one to the whole limb, and the masters put the spine equal as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when it is even, apply a drying plaster with abundant honey, and then press it, and then place the edge of a plate of three inches long, to protect the joint from the gout and the part of the spine healthy, then tie it with a bandage as we have said, and use subtle pressure until they are healed; and if anything happens at the end of the health, then administer medicines that are softening and soothing, with the method we have mentioned before; and never give one piece of plaster, and never does it appear in the back spine of the back, and consider that this is dislocation; and it is the bone that opens, for which we should not have any presumption: perhaps it would cause death.
des dislocations de la hainche	of shoulder dislocations
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	It is said that the joints of the shoulder and the joints of the back do not come out only as dislocations, but also in a different way; and the joint of the back is dislocated in four parts: inside and outside, front and back; and more inside than that, and less dislocated front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of this dislocation inside is such that when one joins the bad leg with the good one, it is longer and wider than the good ones, and cannot bend its knee to the fire; and it is the legs that are swollen from abscesses, because the complaint of the hip comes out.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of one who comes after this is that these accidents are contrary to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of one who has this before are that he stands well on his leg according to completion; however, if he doubles over with pain in the groin, and if one wants to make him walk, he cannot go forward, and retains his urine, and swells up with anger, and when he walks, he passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of one who has this after are that he cannot spread his groin, nor double over, and that leg is more bent than the other, and the anger is softened, and the shoulder is dislocated to the side of the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The signs of this type of dislocation are such that if the dislocation is recent, and it remains according to its position, there is no cure; and there is no need for presumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in this case where the dislocation is recent, and it is of four types of dislocation, you must return the joint, and stretch it forward and backward, and move it to the right and left; perhaps if it returns, and there is no need for other treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this way, then you must apply one strong minister, and stretch the leg firmly at two fingers, or at one finger that is tied above the knee; and other ministers extend their hand over the tail in a similar manner as they bite their hands off their shoulders, then pinch the side of the thigh with a soft finger; and some grip the head of the thigh; and stretch up and down all at once, until the pain is raised from the ground once, and remains hanging.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common to four similarities, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If not, it is necessary to treat its similarity. When the dislocation is in the shoulder, it is necessary to feel the pain on the healthy side of the shoulder, then place the elbow under the root of the armpit, and the arm that is outside the arm pit, then extend the elbow above the arm pit, and towards the neck; then take other ministers to grasp the large arm of the misaligned shoulder, and extend it to its proper form: it will return to its arm now; and this method of dislocation is less heavy than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	If you do not press it in this manner that we have said, then it is necessary to tie the two evil legs together with a very strong rope above the two heels, and above the two knees, and let the evil leg be extended two fingers more than the other; then hang it suspended by the head of a stick, and let the other arm be hanging down two arms' length from the ground; then command the minister to grasp the neck of the chicken, and another minister to hold the evil leg, who should grasp it firmly, for the joint is now returning.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocation is on the other side, then cut the evil leg as we have said in the one with gout, and pull the ligament properly above the evil leg, and also above the foot; then put two ties, one at the head and the other at the feet, then fold the tie between the thighs of the evil leg in the correct form; and wrap moist cloths around it, so that it does not bleed, then stretch each minister towards him, and let the patient hold the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it's good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, place it on the table, and press it as we have said in the gilbosite, and grind the bad parts against the clean side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the bad leg quickly, as I have said; and place the pain of being above the bad angle, then press with the other hand, and extend it downwards towards the groin.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is in the back, it is not necessary to extend the bad leg downwards, or lift it up, but it should be as it was when the hip was dislocated backwards, as we have said of the position on the two hips; and it should be on its face, and the limb extended as we have said before, and one must press on the joint at the table; and it will be good when the bad legs extend their legs, and they will be even; then bend the knees, and put the plaster, and the bandage of a cloth, so that the hip does not move; and let it rest for three or four days, then release, and put the plaster on; and if you see that they are even, remove the bandage, and let it walk well, until the limb is comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The shoulder is dislocated in three ways: namely, from within and without, and behind; and it does not dislocate forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the signs are such that you command the patient to bend his leg at the hip, and if he cannot bend it at the hip, then it is dislocated; and the restoration of all is done by making the patient sit with his back against your face, and placing his foot on yours; then take his shoulder in your hands and bring them between your elbows, then bend the two sides of the shoulder firmly; and another minister extends his foot, until the shoulder returns to its place, and the sign is that he can bend his leg at the hip lightly; and apply the plaster to it, and rub the leg against the hip, and loosen it strongly for three or four hours, then remove it; and do not work on the patient's other side until the limbs are comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the member is not straight, administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the ankle dislocation
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The feet are never splinted and never fully dislocated, inside and outside.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the bone is bent, and it hurts when touched at the part where it is dislocated: the remedy is to gently extend it with your hands when it is splinted only.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is dislocated from the beginning, you must first straighten the misaligned bone, and hold it with your hands above the ankle; then take the rope to yourself at your right hand, and then at your left hand twice, then extend it upwards, and tap the rope loudly in the upper part; and do this twice as we have said, pulling and taking the rope; if it returns, it is good; if not, if you start over again, it will return; and if it cannot return in this way, then make the misaligned bone lie on its back on the ground, and firmly fix the rope between its thighs, so that it does not bend the misaligned bone; then hold the ministers' thigh, and other ministers extend the rope to their hands or to the ligament, so that they can tie it above the knee of the misaligned bone; then extend each minister equally, and the ropes should be between the thighs of the misaligned bone to hold it while you are extending it; then put the misaligned bone equal to the dislocation in your hands, and other ministers hold the leg clean on the outside, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it does not go well, apply the plaster and poke through, and let the swelling form, and bind the foot to the leg, and keep the nerves that are above the ankle behind, so that the joint is not too stretched; then leave it for two or three days, and if the swelling does not go down, then take it off again on the third day or fourth, and let it walk for four days; and if it goes before that time, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes, it is necessary that you pacify it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
des dois	for two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the two are dislocated, if they should be gently extended towards labor, and this is a light matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in no part of the joint, then it is necessary that you make the patient sit with the injured limb straight out or on a flat table, and place your hand over what opens from these joints, then press firmly on your hand until it returns; and when it is equal, and there is nothing open, then remove the sole of the foot from the table for two fingers' width, then stretch it firmly, and leave it for three hours, then release; and let him rest, until he is healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wounds and of dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound comes with dislocation, and one wants to restore it, often times the pain is deadly: if you are not presumptuous in the cure, and do not know the art well, and have not used it long, and are not merciful and slow, and not hard; at the beginning of things, gently treat abscesses, and leave the pain in God's hands, if you do not see hope of health; and when you see hope, now reset the member to its place, as soon as the abscesses have come; and when the member is in place, then administer remedies for abscesses, and cure the wound, as it should be, with dry dressings; and if with dislocation there is a break, and small bones are crushed, take out the bone, and do what we have said in simple diseases; and guard against entering into the path of fear, according to what I have said, for this is better for you according to your Creator, and for the knowledge of your armor and your body.
Amen	Amen
