Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	And here is the translation of the given line:
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre,  
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For the operation with the hand is considered deprived in our region and in our time, except that somewhat of its knowledge and the traces of it remain; and nothing remains of it but some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have changed greatly and led to errors and superstitions such that the meanings of it are sealed off and its strength and art have been weakened.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it seems to me that I revive that through the organization of this treatise according to the method of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and so that it comes with the forms of the tools of cautery and other instruments of the work as well as by adding to the explanation, and by preparing it, which is a necessary cause.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	But the reason why no skilled practitioner is found with their hand in our time is that the art of medicine is long, and it requires its practitioner to be exercised in the science of anatomy, which Galen mentions within so that one knows the joints of the members and their forms, and the connection and separation of them; and there is knowledge of the bones, nerves, and veins, and the number of those, and their extension; and of the pulsating veins and the quiet ones, and the places of their origin.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And for this reason Hippocrates says that a name does not matter much, but rather in the deed it is small, and especially in the art of the hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	Here is the translation line by line:
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another doctor who attempted to remove a stone from a man who had suffered in his condition, and the stone was large, and he came to him and extracted that stone with a piece of the bladder, for which that man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I have already called for extracting it, and saw that because of the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, he would die during the procedure.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I saw another doctor who took pay from a duke of our land for surgery, and he came upon a black castrated man who had a fracture in his thigh; and the doctor prepared with his ignorance, extracted the fracture, on the wound, with pillows and splints with strong tension, and did not leave the wound room to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And then untie the bandage according to his desires, and then dress [the wound], and then keep it dry for some days and command that we untie the binding; and thus remain until the thigh and foot become inflamed, and reach destruction.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I was called to him, and prepared to loosen the binding, and relief from his pains was achieved.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But however corruption was already confirmed in the member, because it could not be restrained, and the corruption did not cease to spread throughout the member until the patient was in danger.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And you see another doctor who perforated a cancerous abscess, and it became ulcerated after about those days, during which the malignancy of it was magnified by its lord.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And by this, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation be divided into two parts: one part of the operation which is associated with health, and in the work where there is danger in the most critical conditions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already expressed this throughout the entire book where I describe an operation in which there is error and fear; therefore, it is necessary for you to keep this in mind and let go of that, so that the pages do not find a way to speak and disgrace you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore take up your weapons with diligence and under the protection of God, and treat your patients with happiness and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best method by the grace of God leading to health and favorable outcomes, and leave behind terrible illnesses that are difficult to heal, and protect yourselves from what makes you fear, so that hesitation in your faith and in your name does not escape you: for more remains to your glory, and further on in this world and later for your sanctities.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	When translating this line from the medieval medical treatise:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Do not treat a bad illness improperly, so that you are not named as a bad doctor.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have already divided this book into three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter is ordered concerning the head to the feet, in the forms of instruments and in the tools of cauteries, and about what is necessary for the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, on drying and piercing, and on cupping, and on plasters, and on the extraction of arrows and similar objects, all chaptered and ordered according to the forms of the instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	The division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the treatment of fractures and similar conditions; a chapter ordered from head to foot, and concerning the forms of the instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	On cauteries with fire and sharp medicines and a reminder of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	With that, the treatise on the entire book begins.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	It is necessary for me to say the quality of the benefits of that cautery and of its harms, and in what condition cautery is prohibited.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore, I say that the discourse on the quality of the usefulness and harm of cauterization is long and prolix, subtle due to science, and secretively hidden; many wise people have already spoken about it, and there are disagreements among them, and for me, a little bit of their discourses is enough, fearing lengthiness.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore, I say that cautery is beneficial to all complexions universally, whether they are with matter or without matter, except for two complexions, which are cold complexions without matter.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In a cold and dry complexion with matter, there is disagreement; for some say that cautery is beneficial for that, and others say the opposite, that cautery is not suitable for a disease that is caused by heat and dryness, because the nature of fire is heat and dryness, and it is inappropriate to treat a cold and dry disease with something that is burnt and dry.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And let it be said by those who say the opposite, that cautery provides benefit in all cold and dry diseases that occur in human bodies, because when you compare the body of a person and its moistures to the constitution of fire, you find the human body to be moist. 
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say by the speech of that person, who has experienced this to me several times openly.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	But nevertheless, this does not apply to one who is already experienced and trained in the chapter of cautery from previous exercises, and has known the diversity of human constitution and the disposition of diseases within them, and their causes, and the accidents related to them, and the duration of time for those.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	But in other constitutions, there is no need for fear, especially in cold and humid diseases, for all doctors agree on these, and they do not disagree about treating them with cautery.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, sons, that the secret of healing through cautery with fire and its goodness is that it is better than cautery with burning medicine, because fire is simple, and its action only reaches the member being cauterized and does not harm the adjacent members except slightly.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	But the action of burning medicine spreads to other members that are nearby, and it can cause a difficult-to-heal disease in the affected member and greatly aggravate it.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	But fire, by its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, does not do this; it only purges. And we have known this through experience and long study of the art to understand the truth of the causes. And for this reason, I am excused from a lengthy discourse. But if it were not for the fact that my book has not been read in this brief pause, where the secret is hidden with fire, and the quality of its operation on bodies and its expulsion through which diseases are expelled, demonstrated with philosophical discourse, which would sharpen your minds.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, children, that they forget the time in which it is appropriate to perform cautery and consider the best time of spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that cautery is appropriate at all times, so that the harm caused by accidental timing is overshadowed by the benefit of what is drawn out through cautery, and especially if the cautery is for necessary pains or severe pains, urgent and swift, which do not tolerate delay because it is feared that malevolence may arise from them, which is greater than a small harm entering over time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And this does not fall upon your steps, or, children, it is only valued by the common people and foolish doctors; thus, for that disease which is healed by cautery it is not always recommended, and its consequences are paused. 
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not as they think it to be for this, because a cautery is only in place of medicine which alters the composition and dries out the humors which are the cause of the pains.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	And yet, cauterizations that are excessive on the medicine due to the desire for its health and the virtue of its operation and the greatness of its master.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that their illness may return at some time in the future, according to the condition of the patient and the location of their illness, and the strength of them, and what is prepared in the body due to the accumulation of excesses within them, and what is acquired by them through food and similar causes; but if the illness for which a cautery is administered is a subtle illness in a member with few excesses and humidities, like a dental cautery for pain and similar treatments, it is possible that such pain will not return to them, although this happens rarely.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And it is commonly said that cautery is the last resort of medicine, and this saying is true, not in the way many understand it, for I believe it is not a cure that truly benefits either through medicine or any other cause without cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is contrary to that; the intention that cautery is the last resort of medicine is only when we administer methods of cure in certain illnesses, and those medicines do not confer benefit, and then at the end of treatment, one administers cautery, and it proves effective for that.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And here, in this context, cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the understanding of the common people and too many foolish doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they only said this because of the purity of gold and the excellence of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the site of cautery does not matter, which is not absolutely true, for I have experienced this and found that it only applies to some bodies more than others, and cautery with gold is good and better than with iron as they claimed; however, when you perform cautery using fire and gold, it is not entirely clear, because it ignites according to the quantity you want due to the hardness of the gold, which prepares to receive heat; and if you place it over a flame, the gold melts from the fire, and some flakes fall into the fire, causing inconvenience for the practitioner.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And because of this, cautery with iron should be performed more lightly and more precisely to ensure the correctness of the operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already organized this chapter concerning the cautery according to chapters, and I have arranged those of the head among the feet, so that I can quickly provide the inquirer with what they seek from it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Of cautery for headache caused by cold and moisture.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization confers dryness and heat on the affected area, which are the causes of numerous rheumatic fluxes, called running nose, from the head to the ends of the fingers and ears, as well as excessive sleeping, toothache, and sore throat, and universally all diseases that come from cold, such as paralysis, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cauterization is as follows: first, order the patient to be cleansed with a purgative medicine for three or four nights, according to the strength of the patient, their age, and their habits.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command that they shave their head with a razor. Then have the patient sit between your hands on a low bench and place their hands on their feet.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then place the palm of your hand near the nose between their fingers, close to the nostrils.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, when your middle finger has reached the spot, mark that place with a probe, and then heat the olive cautery, which is of this form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then place that over the marked area with a bandage, in such a way that it descends gradually, with which your hand should gradually tighten it, and you turn that.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then lift your hand lightly and look at the area, and if you see any part of the bone uncovered, about the size of a grain of barley, then raise your hand; and if it does not return with that tool, use another one, if it is cooled down, until the bone appears as I have told you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a little salt and dissolve it over the area and leave it there for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then place over it a piece dipped in oil and leave it there until the heat of the inflammation is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with a tetrapharmacum ointment until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And they say that when the wound remains open, it is better to wash it frequently, because it is healthier and more beneficial.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And some of them say that the area around the bone should be cauterized, and the cautery should be held until some part of the bone's substance adheres to it.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then scrape away what is adhered to the bone, and then clean it.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And others said that with the cautery reach the hip, press strongly into the bone until it smokes, and this is the method of small alphectomy. 
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they believe that from that place, vapors rise from the head.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And if the wound is kept open for a long time, then it should be treated before it becomes consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	But I have not seen these two types of cautery used on everyone, but rather only on some people out of fear; and leave that aside, you must tell me, it is better for health when it is so; for the head is damaged by the disruption of its continuity just as we have testified in other parts of the body, and especially when the patient's head is of a fragile nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first type of cautery is safer and better, you must tell me; and from that use and perform it for health.
Capitol segon.	Second chapter.
Del cauteri del cap.	About the cautery of the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When chronic and prolonged pain occurs throughout the head and persists in the patient, and treatments such as scrapes, poultices, head cleansings, plasters, ointments, salves, and similar remedies have been used without success, especially if it has already been cauterized with a cautery that has not proven effective, then consider whether the patient's head is of strong constitution by nature; and if it is not fragile and you find significant coldness, then cauterize it with another type of cautery for a short time.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then cauterize that area on top of his head using a cautery until the vein is severed.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the vein and expose the amount that has been recounted from the bone, then cauterize it with a cautery at the back of the head in the spot called the sinus, which is the location where the suction cup is placed.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And lift your hand in this procedure, and do not expose the bone, for the patient will find much greater pain from this than from all other cautery procedures on the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I want to describe this cautery in its proper place, because the cautery with which you cauterize the forehead and the occiput should be finer than that with which the middle of the head is cauterized; and this is its form.
Capitol ters.	Third chapter.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	On the cautery of non-traditional migraines.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When severe pain occurs in the part of the head or is felt within the eye, first purify the head with medicines and administer the other treatments that I have mentioned in the sections on diseases; if all this does not help, then cautery can be applied in two ways: either with an acute burning medicine, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	And using a cautery with medicinal burn is that you should take an onion, and clean it and bind its extremities from both ends.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then cut into the painful area on the temple with a slanted lancet so that it reaches the affected spot, where the pain is hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And then apply pressure on it with a bandage using constant compression, and leave it for the space of three hours; and then remove the bandage and place the area in the open air, and let the wound heal for two or three days, and then place something over it soaked in balm until the spot becomes warm.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that area with ointment until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish, do this with some cauterizing medicines, which I have written about in the second treatise on cauterizing medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Also, perform cauterization with an iron according to this method: prepare the cautery iron which has the following form:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	It is called a "clavilh," because the end of it resembles the shape of a clove with some curvature, and in the middle part of it, there is a small protrusion.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And then place it over the painful area, and hold your hand — so that the artery beneath does not stick — and rotate the iron little by little with speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the quantity of it that is adhered by the pressure of the chain is such that half of it, and lift your hand so that the artery is not pressed which is below, so that there does not come a flow of blood.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then soak cloth in salt water and place it on the area, and leave it there for three days; and then apply cloth moistened with ointment, and then treat with salve until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you must, cauterize using the tip of the surgical knife as a cautery, and be careful not to cut the artery in this non-traditional migration area. 
Capitol quart.	Capitol quart.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	From the cauterization of ancient migraines.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat migraines with what we have said about the previous treatment and what we have said in the divisions of diseases, and if the treatment is not effective, and sometimes because of the illness, what we have said about the first cautery with medicine or the cautery with fire is not enough for him, then it is necessary that you heat the scalpel cautery until it becomes white-hot, since you mark the location of the pain with a line as long as half a finger, or something similar; and then place your hand over it once and press it so that you cut through the artery and reach the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to be cautious about the continuation of the jaw, which is damaged by chewing, and that the tendon does not adhere, and the nerve that moves it does not spasm.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the protection and caution of blood flow from an artery that is to be cut, for in cutting it there is fear, especially for one who does not know what he is doing and is inexperienced and rash; and he leaves the operation at its beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And I come with a reminder of the regimen for blood flow accidents from arteries according to its manner, in its place in this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see that this disease is not alleviated by this cautery and the body of the patient seems to tolerate it, cauterize that spot in the middle of the head as we have recounted, and treat the plague until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you wish, administer the cautery which we have mentioned in the chapter on arrow wounds with a cautery having two blades, and this kind of cauterization is better and more appropriate.
Capitol .v.	Capitol .v.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Of the cauterization of ear pains.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When pain in the ear comes from cold and is treated with laxative causes and with the other cure that I have mentioned in the division, and if the pain does not diminish, then apply the cautery, which has the name puncta, of which this is the form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And then puncture near the inflammation, and lead it around the entire ear just as a wheel is turned, or in the circle of each part if the pain is in each one.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	And then gradually extend with the cautery from the rim of the ear as you sense the area with your hand.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery of pointed tips is applied all over the ear, clean that area, and then treat the places in between to ensure they heal.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	On the cautery of tumors.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	A tumor that is treated with cautery is one of the types that come from phlegm, as we have mentioned in the divisions of diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	The cautery is not suitable for the type of tumor that results from drying or spasm of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that type of tumor with diets and purges and fumigations, and if your treatment does not improve the condition, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries: the first at the edge of the ear, the second slightly below its temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And place your cautery on the opposite side of the diseased part, because softening does not occur except in the part that appears healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the method of cautery is to apply the cautery directly at the upper part of the outer ear slightly above the horn of the head, and on the temple in another place, the length of which should be according to the length of the little finger, and keep your hand with the cautery until half the thickness of the area has been burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the shape of the cautery, and it is made of iron, the shape of which has been previously described.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	However, it is more refined if you see it somewhat like this; and it is necessary to reduce any excessive thickness a little.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	Then treat the area with what has been previously processed until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	On the cautery of old apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it with what we have said but your treatment does not take effect and the patient has no fever, then apply cautery at four points: on all the horns of their head; and in the middle of the head as we have said; and with a cautery on the nape.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the method of the cautery is done according to what has been said above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it has already been cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; and it is more behind; then it should be treated with what you proceed with.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	On cautery for forgetfulness caused by flame.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	Give to the patient at the beginning juniper berries and pills that purify the seed.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	Then shave the entire head of the patient and apply a plaster of cerate, as described in the treatise on plasters, to their skull.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And apply that several times, for that is a method of cautery.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do this according to the order of the doctors I have already mentioned.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And if he is well healed by those methods; but if not, then apply three cauteries to the back part of his head, which should descend from the highest part of the head towards the lower part near the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And leave between each cautery the thickness of a finger, and then treat the cautery with what has been prepared.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	And if you apply more intensity and the patient can tolerate it, then make the cautery in the middle; and if you want even more intensity, now cauterize it over both sides.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Then treat that area until it heals; and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to the form previously given.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On the cautery of the appendix and the relaxation of the entire body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	You should proceed with the relaxation of the head using jars and what we have said; then shave the patient's head, and then cauterize it in the middle of the head with a cautery, and with cauteries on all sides of the head, and with a cautery on the back part of it, and with three cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the disease of the body's excessive relaxation and the patient can tolerate it while the disease is severe, then cauterize it with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and finally with a cautery until the swelling of the spine subsides, and lift your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And then treat that which needs healing, and this should be done with an olive cautery.
Capitol .x.	It appears you've provided a section marker or heading, "Capitul .x.", which likely means "Chapter 10" in an old text. Without more context or content from the chapter, I can't provide a translation or summary. If you have specific text from this chapter that needs translation or explanation, please feel free to share it!
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	This phrase appears to be in an archaic form of a Romance language, similar to medieval Latin or early Italian/Spanish/French. It translates to:
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And therefore, it is necessary to treat the brain of the patient at the beginning with herbs and with the other cure that we have mentioned in the section when the illness is severe and the patient can tolerate the exception of the medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who cannot tolerate the medicines, then administer small doses and mix them with masticatory substances that are easily digestible for several days beforehand, improving the food.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize that with a cautery in the middle of the head according to the previous method, and with another cautery on the back of the head, and on each temple of the head it is also cauterized.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize that with the cauteries I have mentioned, having paralysis and softening of the body over the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And let it be an olive cautery according to what is preceded. 
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the patient is a child, then apply a subtle cautery according to this method.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On the cauterization for melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humors and thick phlegm, then cauterize that area with the cauteries we have mentioned in the section on paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is an excess that turns to melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give them something to drink that purifies their brain according to what has been mentioned previously in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	Then shave the head of the patient, then properly apply a decoction made from it around the circle, and then place that in the middle of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And the patient should sit sideways, and be held from all sides.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	Then apply an ointment; and it is better to use old sheep's fat.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And warm that over the fire with moderate heating by measure, which is said to be endured when it is more in it.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And then place that in the middle of his head within the circle, and leave it inside so that it is warmed. 
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do this with the patient for one week, following another regimen of good food until he is healed; or if you wish, cauterize that area making small points according to what is best for him, but ensure that your hand holds a cautery so arranged: this is a type of cautery which moistens the brain equally.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And then place that cloth soaked in vinegar or in ashes of wine lees.
Capitol .xii.	Capitol .xii.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	Of the cautery of water descending into the stomach.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When it is declared that water begins in the bile by the signs which I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient something that cleanses his head, and protect it from all moisture.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And let that person sweat in a bath for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And then command him to shave his head, and cauterize that area with a cautery at the center of the head; then cauterize that area with two cauteries on both temples if it is the beginning of water retention in both eyes, or from one side if it is the start of an issue in one eye.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	And with the cautery, incise all the veins and arteries that are below the chin; and place the cauteries at that length along the width of the temples. 
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And be careful of blood flows when it is being cauterized; and if you see any blood flow, stop it with some medicine, which is available to you.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And I come with wisdom in the extraction of arteries and the cutting of them and caution with blood flows.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And sometimes it is cauterized on the head between two bones with two specially made cauteries.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	On the cauterization of old tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears of the eyes are old and persistent and travel through the veins and arteries that are visible on the surface of the head, and it is confirmed that this is due to excessive cold phlegm, then cauterize that area with a cautery as described in the chapter on the beginning of water flowing into the eyes. Use a cautery at the middle of the head and two cauteries between the temples, and two cauteries between the bones at the back of the head.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if additional treatment is needed, then cauterize the area on the outer side of the eye socket above the eyebrow endpoint with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Capitol .xiiii.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	From the cauterization of nasal odor.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat that ailment with what we have said in the division and your treatment does not improve, then prepare and give to drink to the patient decoctions for three nights; and then shave his head, and cauterize the ailment moderately with olive oil cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then cauterize that area with a clover-shaped cautery, using two cauters on both eyebrows, leaving the hair slightly untouched.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And be careful of the artery so that you do not burn it.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And this is the form of the clamp cautery.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On the cautery for softening the eyelids of wounds.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the eye is softened by disease or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with this lunar cautery; and this is its form:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you do, cauterize that area above both eyebrows a little with two cauteries in all parts, and extend them towards the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the size of the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard with your hand using the cautery, but to the extent that one-third of the eyelid is attached.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	On the cautery of the eyelid of the eye when the hairs turn inward and poke the eye.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hairs of the nose are converted into internal parts in such a way that they irritate the nose, cautery is performed on those areas in two ways, either by iron or by burning medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you burn with fire, command the patient before this to shave their hairs just as those which are cleaned, so that they are shortened and leveled; and if you need to, pluck them from their roots, then hold the skin of the area with a bandage so that it is not harmed until the hairs have grown back.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	When the hairs have grown back and are leveled, then place the head of the patient in your lap, and then apply something over the eyelids of the area with a tent-shaped device, which should be according to the shape of a leaf of merta, and the beginning of the device should be close to the hairs. 
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And then apply something soaked in egg white or in a paste of flour on the wound.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And then heat the cautery, which has this shape.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And then cauterize over the figure which you have marked, little by little, in small sections, until the surface of the chain, which appears like a myrtle leaf, is completely burned.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And the sign of health in your work is that you see the eyelid of the wound already contracted and the hairs standing up from the puncture of the wound.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And then raise your hand and leave it like that for three days, and then apply something on it with bandages until the scar is healed.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if any cause returns through the hairs near their root and the eyelid is softened, then apply the cautery again over that area just as you did initially.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	And if the hairs are in the eyelid area, then cauterize that place so that it is raised to its natural position and smoothed out so that the hairs do not irritate the eye.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And the cauterization with burning medicine commands the patient to pull out the hairs so that they are extended and smoothed, and then make a shape like a miter leaf from linen cloth.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	Then take soap known and fresh ashes in the amount of an uncia or however much is needed, and thoroughly mix those ingredients without cooling them; then spread this over the linen cloth that has been made in the shape of a miter leaf, and place it on one eye or both; and let the eye be covered immersed in egg white, and the patient's head should be in your hand.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And place your finger on the medicine and press it slightly without damaging it until the patient feels the sting of the medicine, for the sting is like that of fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And when you perceive that the intense sting has occurred, then remove the medicine and wipe it away with your finger; once the sting ceases, then remove the medicine and wash the eye with water; now consider if the eyelid has already been raised as needed, and if so, clean the constriction with fire or incision, for it is then done well; but if not, return to applying the medicine on the area where it did not take effect and continue until your operation is smoothed out and the eye contracts.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then place over the wound a barrier so that the bond of adhesion is prevented, and then treat it with an ointment or another substance to promote healing.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you to perform your operation with vigilant diligence so that no part of the medicine falls into the eye, and if the eyelid becomes softened near those days and any cause of hair punctures the eye, then reapply your medicine to the area where the eyelid has been softened, just as you did at the beginning, and then surround it with a substance that promotes healing.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the form of the mithra leaf. 
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And know that the veins of men are diverse according to their size and smallness, and therefore according to this your treatment is made.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And the path to complete knowledge should not be hidden from one who studies this art.
Capitol .xvii.	It seems like you've provided a chapter or section heading, "Capitol .xvii.", which likely translates to "Chapter XVII" in English. This indicates the start of the seventeenth chapter in a text. If you need further translation or information from this chapter, please provide more context or text.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On the cautery of a fistula that is in the lacrimal duct of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases and your treatment does not agree, then it is necessary that you cauterize it according to this method: command the patient to place their head on your shoulder, and hold the patient’s head with one of your assistants between your hands in such a way that it is not moved or agitated with their own head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	Then apply some infused oil or a poultice of lint on the wound of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then ignite the cautery, which has the following form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which should be hollow, like the shape of a reed or a vulture's quill, at one end where the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you wish, it can penetrate through the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want, let it be done in such a way that it penetrates.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	However, the one that is concave is better for your work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And then press the fistula if it is open, and extract the pus from it and dry that area.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And then place on it the cautery which is well ignited, and hold that with your hand a little distance from the nose, so that your hand does not burn or disturb the patient, and then place the cautery on the nostril and char that area.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And if at the beginning of your cautery you penetrate into the bone, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice, as needed; and leave it that way for three days, and then place a poultice on that wound and surround it with a drying ointment until it heals.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	But if ten days have passed and it is not healed, then apply a sharp corrosive medicine to it until the bone is exposed and scraped as appropriate in its chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And there is another method of cautery for a fistula which some earlier practitioners described: insert into the site of the fistula and open it, then place in that fissure a thin wire that matches its shape; and pour into that an amount equal to one inch of melted lead; hold the wire firmly with your hand so that the patient is not moved so that the melted lead does not reach beyond that area; it is necessary to place over the patient’s fistula site something like egg white or water, because lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it through a miraculous healing process.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cauterization and treatment, that is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer a probe into the nose and reduce the fistula to the body of the nose so that it returns to its proper place.
Capitol .xviii.	Capitol .xviii.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	From the cautery of the split in the foot.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	When white motes cause splits in the lips, especially in the lips of children,
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, when you treat those fissures with what we have said in the divisions and your treatment is not effective, then use the small knife-like cautery according to this form that is shown:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And let the cavity be adjusted according to the delicacy of that area. 
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	And place that heated instrument carefully into those fissures so that the cautery reaches the bottom of the fissures.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with ointment until it heals.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On the cautery of a fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When an abscess forms at the root of the uvula or on the palate or at the roots of the teeth, and then it swells, and then it bursts, and then it becomes old, and pus flows out and a fistula is formed, and if you treat it but it does not improve toward healing, then you must ignite a cautery according to the size that fits into the fistula. Then insert that ignited cautery into the track of the fistula, holding your hand so that the heated iron reaches the bottom of it; this procedure is done once or twice. And then treat it with what we have mentioned for healing until it heals.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And if the pus is separated and it heals, that is good; but if not, then it is necessary to expose the area and remove the corrupted bone, as will be detailed in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Capitol .xx.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	Of cautery of the teeth and of softening of the veins.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the veins are softened by humidity and the teeth are painful, and you treat those with medicines but without success, then place the head of the patient on your knee, and then apply the cautery in such a way that when you place the quill over the tooth, you quickly insert the ignited cautery into it, and hold your hand slightly so that the patient feels the heat of the fire reaching to the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	Then remove your hand, and then repeat the cautery several times as you wish.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	Then the patient should rinse his mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, and afterward spit it out, for the painful tooth is fixed, the softened gum is strengthened, and the corrupted humidity is dried.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On the cautery for toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is caused by cold, or if it is frozen or inflamed, or if you do not achieve healing with medicine, then apply cautery in two ways: either use cow dung for the cautery, or use fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Here is the translation line by line:
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then repeat that several times until the heat from the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you wish, soak wool or cloth in the aforementioned mixture, place it on the painful tooth, and put a heated iron over it until the heat reaches the core of the tooth's cavity.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, when cauterizing with fire, you should pay attention to the thickness of the tube or iron, and it should have some roughness in the core so that the intensity of the heat does not reach the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then heat the cautery to the shape it will take, and place it on the tooth while holding your hand until the cautery is cooled; do this several times until the pain is reduced, whether on that day or the next day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And it is necessary that, due to the application of that cautery, the patient fills their mouth with a good mixture and holds it for an hour, then rinse it out; this is the form of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize whichever extremity you wish according to what is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the form of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	Capitol .xxii.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	Of the cauterization of extrophetus (likely meant to be "extrophalus," a term referring to hernias or protrusions).
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When the hernias are caused by phlegm and cold humors and do not obey digestion through medicines and you wish to digest those lightly, then you ignite the cautery in the shape of which is as follows, having two hooked ends so that smoke comes out from one end, and place that ignited cautery over that swelling once, and repeat if necessary until it reaches the core of the swelling.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the abscess is small, then apply the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and afterwards leave it for three days and place something over it so that what the fire has burned is covered until it is healed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with ointment and bandages until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the form of the cannula or cautery to be used is conical.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On the cautery for hoarseness of voice and constriction of the windpipe.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When the humidities affect the canal of the lung, especially when this is due to cold constitution, then it is necessary that the patient be treated initially with laxative medicines, and then apply cautery to the appropriate area at the base of the throat in the affected region.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And be careful not to penetrate too deeply with the cautery into the throat, and do not burn more than a little of the tissue there.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize that area with another cautery at the joint of the neck in the last vertebra of the patient.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And the cautery of it should be done with a heated needle following the previous method. 
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with what is used before it heals. 
Capitol .xxiiii.	Capitol .xxiiii.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	Of the cautery of lung disease and cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung disease are caused by infiltrating humidities, and the patient does not have fever or tuberculosis and it is an old illness, then cauterize that area with two cauteries on the collarbone at the places of the upper and lower ends; and with another cautery in the middle of the foot between the two mounds; and let the cautery be in the shape of a claw as per the previous form.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, let your cautery be a point using the cautery that is called puncta, the form of which you precede in the puncturing for ear pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And let there be points inside the eyes at those locations; then treat that with the method that is preceded, until it is healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And let the cautery have three ridges for this kind of cautery: with one application, you can make three cauteries according to this form.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On the cautery for titillic, which is at the top of the helper [likely referring to a specific part of the body or an assistive structure].
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the joint is dislocated due to lubricating humidities and does not stay fixed during its return, you must place its dislocation in such a way that it customarily returns, and then with a slight movement, it is dislocated so as to be felt, just as we have testified; therefore, first reduce the dislocation, and then the patient should be turned over onto their back or side; and then lift the tendon which is inside the joint upwards with your left hand's fingers if the joint is dislocated on the inside.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then heat the cautery which has two heads; and this is its form:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the tendon so that it penetrates from one side to the other; and the result will be a figure formed by four-headed cauteries.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And thus those subtleties depend on the amount of tension; and this is its form:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And sometimes it is adjusted according to this method, and that is why the cauteries are eight.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then place salt on the cautery points, and subsequently ensure that the patient is calm, and do not move the limb for some time until it is comforted.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is in the upper part and this has occurred, then cauterize over the muscle with a chisel cautery or with multiple pointed cauteries, for the joint is confirmed, the humidity is reduced, and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On the cauterization of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When cold and various humidities come into the stomach and that part deviates from its composition and increases phlegm in it, and if you continue with the methods of treatment but do not confirm this, then the patient should lie on their back, extend their hands and thighs, and then cauterize that area with three cauteries: place one cautery under the feet to the length of a finger using a chisel cautery, and with two other cauteries beside each side of the first cautery so that it forms a triangular shape; space them out so they do not touch to avoid excessive burning.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is two-thirds the thickness of the chain.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And the shape of the cautery should be according to this form with this addition: And if you wish, use a large cautery in the middle of the stomach area as per this form; and this should be a circular-shaped cautery according to this form.
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And let the stomach be cauterized punctually for those who are afraid of this cautery: it is that you place upon the stomach points according to the quantity you wish with a probe, and then cauterize those points with a cautery; and then treat it with the treatment that precedes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	On the cauterization of cold spleen.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When pain in the spleen occurs due to cold or moisture or excessive wind that deviates from its normal composition by superfluous discharge, and if the patient is treated with what we have said but does not improve, then the patient should be made to lie on their back, and you place three cauteries according to this form and this quantity right over the spleen below the hypochondria, taking care of the position of the body.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of the finger, and let the cautery be according to the length of the body straight.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not move the cautery with your hand.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the quantity that is added equals half the weight of the chain, and it is not adjusted more; and if the patient is standing on their feet; and if they are not standing, then let them lie down, with their limbs already extended, and raise their arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is possible for you to cauterize these areas with a knife-shaped cautery, when you are subtle and prudent in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And be careful not to proceed too much in the cauterization, and attach the weight of the entire chain so that the whole body is attached and reaches inside the intestines, for the chain here is subtle; and be aware of this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	Of puncturing an abscess of the liver with a cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When there is an excrescence or abscess in the liver and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the liver or in its membrane, then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the patient will experience heaviness and pain which is intensified.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the membrane of the liver, then the pain is greatly intensified and often even exhausts the doctors' efforts to cure it.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, the patient should be turned over on their back; then examine the site of the abscess with a probe; then heat the cautery which is shaped like a rod, the form of which was described on the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize with that cautery until all the pus is drained, until it reaches the core, until it no longer discharges pus.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	Then treat it in the same way as other abscesses until it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And this form of cautery should only be used by those whose study in the art of medicine is extensive, and who have knowledge of many illnesses; however, one might sometimes dare to attempt this operation with experience, but it is better to leave it to those who are skilled.
Capitol .xxix.	Capitol .xxix.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	From the text provided and the structure of the language used, it seems like an old form of Romance languages mixed with medieval medical terminology. The phrase "De cauterizacio de plauresi" can be broken down as follows:
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor,
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then submerge it in oil and dry it by the fire; then cauterize with a cautery at that place which is between the continuation of the collarbone and the neck; and with two small cauters guide them, slightly inclining towards the part below the beard; and with two cauters on that which declines between the fifth rib and the spine, slightly inclined to the parts behind; and with another cautery in the middle of the foot; and with another over the stomach, and with three cauters at the parts behind; and with one cautery at that place which is between the two shoulders, and with two cauters on each side of the foot, placing the cautery which is between both shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And you do not need to hold the cautery with your hand, but rather apply it at the site of the wound itself.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And the ancients have also said that some people use an iron cautery resembling a ray and heat it, then apply it to the area between the ribs, until they reach the abscess and the pus is evacuated, just as we have described for the abscess of the liver.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	And in this perforation with cautery there is no fear, for one dies as soon as you intervene at the site of the fistula which cannot be healed.
Capitol .xxx.	The text provided seems to be in a medieval Romance language with similarities to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. However, the line you've asked for translation is simply "Capitul .xxx." which appears to be indicating the beginning of chapter 30 (".xxx" being Roman numerals for thirty). 
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Regarding the cauterization of the tonsils. 
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat the disease of the armpit with what we have said about treatment in the division and if your treatment does not achieve results, then cauterize it according to three methods, all of which are correct. One of these is to make three or four linear cauteries along the length of the armpit according to the shape of the cautery for fat, the shape of which has preceded [been previously described].
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And there should be the thickness of a finger or a little more between each cautery, and the method of the cautery should be the method we have mentioned for fat cauterization as well.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not move your hand during the cautery; and the patient should be lying on their back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And another method of cauterization is to burn the cautery very intensely, the cause of which we have mentioned in the chapter on muscle dislocation, and lift the chain that is along the armpit towards the side where the patient lies on their left side.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And let your elevation, with which you lift the chain, be according to the length of the body, so that cauteries are made according to the width of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then insert the two burning cauterizing agents into that area where you penetrate with them from one side to the other.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then remove the cautery; and thus four cauteries are made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you want, cauterize with a cautery having three vents.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then you treat the cautery after it has stopped bleeding for several days, because it is more convenient than other preceding causes in the treatment. 
Capitol .xxxi.	Capitol .xxxi.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	From the cautery of dropsy.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you treat the dropsical with the methods of cure which we have mentioned in the division and do not achieve your treatment, then it is necessary to cauterize using four cauteries around the navel and one cautery on the stomach, and another cautery on the spleen, and another cautery on the liver, and two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and a cautery at the center of the foot, and another cautery on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the depth of the cautery should be determined according to the sharpness of the instrument.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	Then leave the cautery open so that it burns for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the patient from treatment immediately after the cautery because it is necessary for two intentions to be added to it, and thus it will quickly aid in their recovery.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery with which the abdomen is cauterized should be claw-like, according to the previously described form, and the shape of the cautery with which the back is cauterized should be olive-shaped, according to its previously described form.
Capitol .xxxii.	Capitol .xxxii.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	Of cautery of feet and of the thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are inflamed with dropsy and filled with watery fluid, you should cauterize the feet on the sole of the foot near what is between the thumb and the little finger, lift your hand with the cautery without twisting it; then raise your hand, but do not completely return it, because the watery fluid subsides.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The cautery should be in this form: Then make two cauteries on both thighs, and on each thigh a cautery should be made with the blade end of the knife-shaped cautery.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And the cautery should be according to the length of the thigh: place one at the top and the other at the middle of the thigh; and on each thigh, two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And leave the wound open for a long time so that some water may drain from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	Then treat it with those causes which we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	Of the cautery of the abdominal area.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the abdominal area is weakened by cold and moisture that debilitate its functions, those being digestive and retentive which are in the stomach and intestines, it should be treated with curative methods and not through confusion, and sometimes patients may suffer from a cautery to exhibit strength, then you should cauterize that area with a large cautery on their stomach according to the previous cautery of the stomach, using a circular cautery and four small subtle cauteries around the navel, with a subtle claw-shaped cautery; and also use a cautery on the alcatin over aloes gran, or with two cauteries. 
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if you remove the excessive humidity and the patient tolerates it, then cauterize that on the penis and on the intestines, and strongly apply two cauteries over the stomach and near the groin, for this is a perfectly effective cure which cannot be wrong.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Capitol .xxxiv.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	Of the cauterization of old hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When it is in the nature of old hemorrhoids or one of thick humors infiltrating or corrupted humidities, and they are treated with what we have said in the division and you do not agree with your own treatment, then cauterize with three cauteries on the pus near the lower spine and small triangular area, and with a cautery above the navel by two fingers.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you suspect that the stomach of the patient is chilled and their food is not digested, and their face sometimes becomes inflamed, then cauterize that area over the stomach with a large cautery as previously indicated; and with one cautery on the spleen, and another cautery on their liver with a claw-shaped cautery, and leave the cautery open for some time, and then treat them internally so that they may be healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	On the cauterization of the throat near the removal of them (the tonsils).
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you cut away the tonsils, then heat the cautery that resembles a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	And introduce that fire into the severed artery, and finally place your hand inside so that the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood comes.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do this once or twice, for if they are too many [points], then cauterize each of them as we have recounted, and afterwards treat those with whatever ointment you deem appropriate until it is healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery over an ulcer, it is more delayed in healing.
Capitol .xxxvi.	The given text appears to be in an archaic or constructed language that has elements of Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. The term "Capitol" followed by ".xxxvi." seems like it might indicate a chapter number (Chapter 36). Here is my attempt at translating this particular line:
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	Of the cautery of fistulas that are formed naturally in the regions of the body.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the treatment we have recommended for it, and the patient is frightened by this, they should be treated with cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	When someone has an old fistula in the natural posterior region, and it discharges pus and corrupted moisture, what is most appropriate to do is to probe it with a fine needle, and then determine the depth of it with the aforementioned needle.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then heat the cautery that resembles a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	Then apply the heated cautery to this fistula according to the depth measured by the probe.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeat the cautery on that area until those corrupted tissues are thoroughly burned, once or two or three times, according to the extent of your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And be careful not to burn the nerves and veins; or if the fistula extends to the body of the bladder or the intestines, be cautious around all those areas; do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy area and you think it is not penetrating deeply.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area so that it may heal.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the area is sealed, and its materials are cut off from it, and remains this way for a long time, then you know that it is entirely cured.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the materials are not removed from it, then you know that they are penetrating either into the marrow of the corrupted bone or that this comes from those causes which will lead to a recurrence in its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter XXXVII.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On the cauterization of hemorrhoids.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When hemorrhoids cause pain due to cold or excessive wind (gas), and because of this, the sitting of the patient is hindered, then it is necessary to cauterize those areas over the hemorrhoids with a cautery, applying a nail-shaped cautery specifically to each hemorrhoid to prevent recurrence.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And strongly cauterize them with the second one slightly apart, so that three linear cauteries will result, and thus they will be more effective in healing.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Capitol .xxxviii.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	Of the cautery of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When you encounter a bladder that is weakened and softened by cold and moisture to the point where the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize it in the part just below the bladder, where the pubic hair begins. Cauterize with one cautery on the right side, and with another on the left side of it.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the number of stones in the bladder; cauterize that with a cautery on the lower part of the back, or with two cauters if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And let the cautery be in the shape of a clamp according to how it is processed. 
Capitol .xxxix.	The line "Capitol .xxxix." appears to be an indication of a chapter or section number in Roman numerals. In English, this can be translated as:
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Of the cauterization of the thigh.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When cold and humidity come to the thigh, and for this reason impregnation is prohibited, and the menstrual flow of women is corrupted, and the provocation of it is delayed, and pain occurs due to the retention of it, then the area must be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a cautery on the most affected side, or with two cauteries, and let the cautery be like a claw.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter XL.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When cold and moist humors are infused into the area of the ankle, and they cause it to slip out of its proper place, a sign of this is that one leg appears longer than the other when compared.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the site of the dislocation is identified where there is pain.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then it is necessary to cauterize the patient on the area of the ankle with a circular cautery, after you have marked the site with your finger around the dislocated area as it has turned, and in such a way that the dislocation falls at the center of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And here is the translation of the given line:
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize that area with three olive-sized large cauteries.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And let the cautery be performed according to the extent of the spread throughout the entire chain; then treat that which needs healing within.
Capitol .xli.	It appears you've provided a chapter or section heading, "Capitul .xli.", which translates to "Chapter XLII" in English, assuming the Roman numeral ".xli." refers to 41 and is followed by the next sequential number. If this is part of a larger text or if you need further assistance with translation or context related to this chapter heading, feel free to ask!
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	On the cautery of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain comes to the upper part of the body and is caused by cold and moisture, the patient is treated with what we have said and do not add anything else, for this is outdated. Now you must purge the patient of thick humors with foul pills or artificial pills or similar ones; then cauterize that area.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the method of cautery in this case is according to two methods: either cautery with burning medicines, or cautery with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	It is done according to two known methods, one of which is to cauterize that area on the broad part of it with three triangular cauteries in this form; and make a good depth with those.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And the space between each cautery should be the quantity of the thickness of a finger, and the cautery should be olive or grain-shaped.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Sometimes the cautery should be placed directly on the top of the ankle, making four cauteries in total.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, cauterize with a circle, which precedes the form in the cautery of the dislocation of the ankle, where the circle should contain and burn the entire length of the tendon.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the method of cautery for gout when pain is attached to the ankle and does not extend into the thigh.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	But if the pain extends into the thigh, then cauterize it with two cauteries on the thigh at the location where you ask the patient where the pain is; and with one cautery on the calf, about four fingers away from the outer part.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cautery is knife-like, and the depth of the cautery should be according to the degree of protrusion of the chain.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the patient tells you that the pain is spreading around the area near the toes of the feet, then cauterize that area where they indicate with a cautery using three points or four or more if needed from there.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the patient tells you that the pain is moving from the knee to the thigh, then cauterize that area with a blade-shaped cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And be careful in all cauterizations that you do not use the cautery so much that you burn nerves or major arteries, and by this means, you do not harm the patient or cause contraction.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have seen some who cauterized on the ankle and continued the cauterization so excessively that the burning heat swelled until it reached the foot, and the fire penetrated and corrupted the entire foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	Then a strong discharge from the stomach occurs, and as a result, death may follow.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two separate parts, cauterize each one according to this method.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise ones said thus in the cauterization with this type of cautery, of which this is the method: make a circle of iron whose circumference is half a palm; and its hole should be as wide as a date bone or slightly less.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And within that circle there is another third; and the space between them is the width of a thumb; and those circles are opened from both sides; and the length of those rods is one or two thumbs, and make on those edges of iron decently arranged in the circles; and this is the form of it:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	And it should be ignited in the fire until it reddens and sparks, and then it should be placed on the affected area of the ankle, with the patient lying on their side.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And therefore, cauterize that area with three round cauteries at once.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then leave that for three days; then treat that with a plaster and leave the wound open for several days; then cure that with ointments until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Diet of Albucasis: oh, sons, we have rarely used this kind of cautery due to the fear of its appearance, and because few have found it worth looking into.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	However, for those who have suffered well from it, apply it to the affected area with that cautery.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	However, for cauterization with adhering medicines, you should make two circles using a perforated armula similar to the keyhole of an iron door; let the length of the walls be such that they are about two nuts or keys in size.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space between each of these is equal to the thickness of a finger; and they should be placed below and above, and they should contain each other in this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And then place your hand over the area of the ankle while the patient is lying on their side, and press your hand firmly on the part of the ankle; then take warm water and pour it between two circles, and the quality of that should be close to a small fire little by little, and keep that for about an hour, and the patient must endure the burning and adjustment — for this treatment causes such burning as if from fire — until the burning subsides.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then lift your hand with the instrument and clean the entire ankle with warm water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then let that rest for three days and place something over it until the blackness from the burning is gone, and leave it like that for several more days, and pus will flow out of it; this is the final stage of healing.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with ointments until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain spreads to the thigh or the abdomen, apply the same treatment as was done for the ankle, ensuring it contains water accordingly.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the method of hot water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Take an equal part of alkali and unextinguished wood ash, mix them together, and place the mixture in a new bowl, one part of which should be pierced with a small hole according to the amount that can fit inside. 
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And place the bottom of the wound over another inflamed ulcer, and pour on it an alkaline substance and hot water that covers them to a finger's depth, and then compress them with your hand for good compression, and let the sharp water that flows from it descend into the part of the inflamed ulcer.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then mix all that water, and pour it over another living cause and another renewed alkaline, because at that time it will have strong acidity, which is administered in many medical operations and in the cauterization of other members, as this operation is done with fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And among some of the medicines with which a broad cautery is performed, thus as with sulfur and honey and soap mixed in this way.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Gualia recounts of an ancient man's operation and cure with which pain in the ankle and sciatic vein is treated, and he greatly praises that method, saying that no other cure is necessary, and that one is healed by doing it once as recommended, for he puts that joint in a bath and is already free from that.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it is that wormwood should be taken, and if wormwood cannot be found, a fresh fig should be used; and it should be crushed with a little salt and placed on the ankle where the pain is, or on the thigh, or on the abdomen, and bandaged.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And it should be left on for the quantity of three hours or for the amount of time that the patient feels relief from the application.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	Then place it in a bath and when the body is warmed, immerse it in the soil, for the pain will cease and be healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that it is not necessary for anyone to use cautery with these medicines except near the evacuation of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	However, Escorides says that when the venous wound is cauterized with goat's milk, it greatly benefits; and the cautery should be applied in the following manner: take wool and soak it in old oil, then place it between the toes and over the wound.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	Then take dried goat's milk and inflame it with fire until it becomes charcoal; then place it on the wool and spread it out.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And then repeat this, and do not stop doing this until the sensation of the bite reaches up to the ankle and relieves the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this method of cautery is called cow cautery.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On the cautery of foot pain.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Sometimes pain in the feet is caused by various reasons, such as from a fall or from impact or from excessive evacuation, and by causes similar to these, due to the infiltration of cold and humid matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cautery should only be applied in this specific case which is caused by the infiltration of cold matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, after evacuating the patient with suitable pills and similar treatments, three lines should be drawn on the foot where the pain is, according to its width, and then make marks with a tenth of an inch between each line, placing five cauteries or more, depending on the tolerance of the patient and their strength.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And let the cautery be done with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, cauterize with three cauteries or with four using a medial claw-shaped cautery according to this form:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XLIII.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On the use of cautery at the onset of jaundice.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	This disease often appears in small children; and the sign of its onset in children is that it affects their structure, causing stiffness and movement difficulties.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And you will find that the lower vertebra of the spine and the bones begin to protrude over the other vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And therefore, when you see this and wish to prevent it, then cauterize that area with a circular cautery according to this form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	that the cautery should be applied evenly over the entire part of the vertebra.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you wish, cauterize around the circumference of the vertebra with a pointed cautery in two lines or three.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And let the points be made close together.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	Then treat the area in between so that it heals with what we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	Be careful not to apply the cautery to swelling that has been caused by nerve spasms.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On the cautery treatment for gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and when pains occur in the feet, doctors customarily call this condition gout properly.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And thus, when gout caused by cold is treated with this method of cure and the pains are not alleviated, then use cautery to relieve them.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And it is that you should cauterize around the joint of the foot in a circular pattern with multiple cautery points.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let the cautery be an olive-shaped one, which has the following form:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pain rises into the fingers or other joints, and this often happens, then apply cautery to each finger with three or four burns from all sides using an olive-shaped cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if more cauteries are necessary than these you have, then apply the cautery but do not press your hand too hard with the cautery beforehand; only hold it around the size of a finger.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pain spreads into the finger and hand, then apply the cautery that we have described in its chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pain is in the muscles only, and it is called suagra (possibly a variant of "sciatica"), then puncture around the spine as it curves, piercing along those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pain remains in the wrists, then puncture around the spine on each wrist and on the palm of the hand. 
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pains can approach over several days to the joints or muscles, then cauterize those areas all around with the help of aids.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not evacuate the patient of good regimen and reception of medicines, for if a good regimen is followed and phlegm is evacuated with this cautery, they will be healed, God helping.
Capitol .xlv.	Capitol .xlv.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	From the cautery of ruptures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When there is inflammation in the knees and the intestines appear before the hernia, and this begins to happen nearby, then you must order the patient to leave their food for the day and use laxative causes so that the discharge descends from their belly.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	Then follow the patient with your hands on their back, and command them to keep their body still until the hernia or the intestine appears or is expelled.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	Then return and, with your fingers, carefully examine the rupture over the bone of the pelvis, using an instrument whose tip is similar to half a circle, directed towards the lower parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then prepare the cautery, which has the following form:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	until it becomes red hot and gives off sparks.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its proper cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out again.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion underneath. Another servant should be on the patient’s chest, and another on their feet, with one holding the patient’s hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And then place the cautery on that mark with your hand holding the cautery straight, and get that into the bone of the heel in the middle of the wound; and repeat with that again if you have not achieved it in the first attempt to reach the bone.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And carefully observe the condition of the intestine during your cautery, so that you do not burn the intestine, which could cause death or other serious harm to the patient.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your operation is not successful.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And it is necessary that the cautery for children be delicate according to their size and proportion.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And then care for the area of the cautery for three days with ointment until the scar from the fire is healed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that area with other ointments until it is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient should lie on their back for forty days until the area and the wound are fully healed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And it is necessary to control the patient's nutrition according to the length of their treatment time, which reduces the patient’s abdomen, and to prevent the intestine from coming out due to the effort of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And then when one wants to lift [the patient] after about forty days, then administer a properly prepared remedy, and let them have it for another forty days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And let them be reduced in labor and the excess of food and drink, and loud voices, for when they use this regimen of complete healing, they will be healed.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And I will describe the treatment of ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and at the beginning, if they do not heal, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size, and let what is protruding from the hernia be as much as one-third of it; then treat that as we have said, and it should not be tightened.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And some of the earlier [physicians] have said that a rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, because it is marked out with a template.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And it is a paused line that you place across the widest part of the side where the rupture is, and another line above; then apply your hand with a claw cautery, but the first cautery should be lighter and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Capitol .xlvi.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Of the cautery of contusions.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain occurs in higher limbs due to trauma or impact and that pain persists for a long time and does not improve with usual treatments using medications, then it is necessary to use a pointed cautery to cauterize.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the cautery should be applied to the entire limb according to its size and smallness, strength and weakness, and the location of the injury and pain.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Therefore, if it is healed by the first cautery, that is good; and if not, then apply the cautery again. Because typically such pains require punctures on the limb near the area of pain, so you must continue to use the cautery until the patient is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	On the cautery of leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Some lepers see great improvement with cautery, especially those suffering from a type of leprosy caused by the putrefaction of blood and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And when you wish to cauterize the patient, first determine if the leprosy is common and can be cured with the methods we have described in the division. If not, and you fear that the corruption may spread throughout the entire body and all its composition, then cauterize on the head with five cauteries: one at the center of the head, another slightly below it near the forehead where the hair ends; two on both temples; and one behind, on the nape or neck.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And place your hand with the cautery slightly inside so that it presses on the bone a little, and from there remove the scales, so that the expiration of thick vapors is relieved from him; and cauterize over the bladder as necessary.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if leprosy has already spread over the patient and appears manifestly, then you must cauterize that area with those cauteries which we have mentioned in the chapter; and with a cautery on the tip of the nose, and with two cauteries on both cheeks, and with two cauteries on two vertebrae of the neck, and with ten cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and with one large cautery on the vertebrae near the hip, and one on the hip itself, and with two on the knees, and one on each knee, and with two on the elbows, and one on each elbow, and with two on the ankles, and one on each ankle; and cauterize that over all the joints of his fingers and toes, and over each heel of his feet, and over the joints of his wrists.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And be careful of the nerves that are on the heel so as not to burn those.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And sometimes it is cauterized with one cautery on the bone of the pelvis and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the spleen.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more you apply cauteries, the more beneficial and effective it is; and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery, just as they do not feel it on their skin, because their body is already numbed.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And it is necessary that the cauteries be large or few according to the limbs and joints, as dictated by the specifications of the tools. 
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the cautery with flour mixed with honey and with other treatments until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Of cautery for stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When any limb is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, but it does not heal, then you should cauterize that numbed limb with cauteries according to the size of the limb or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let your cautery enter the incision of the cord a little bit.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then treat that area with ointment until it is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And sometimes a numbness that affects the hands and feet, and the vertebrae of the back, is cauterized to address the weakening of the nerves which affect that limb, and the numbness is reduced.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	But do not undertake this unless you are knowledgeable about the anatomy of the limbs and the distribution of nerves throughout the moving body.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLIX.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On the cauterization of moles that are malignant.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When a mole is old and does not respond to any of the medicinal ointments, then you should cauterize it with a cautery applied slightly according to the amount of protrusion of the mole until the whiteness and color of it are reduced, and its color changes.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with flour of bran and lentils mixed with anointed oil and leaves of arnica, and with the blood of a dove or the blood of a wren, each in equal parts and all mixed together, and then line a cloth and place it over the area until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	It seems like you've provided a section marker or title that indicates the start of a chapter or a significant division in a text, possibly from an old document or manuscript. The ".l." could mean "Chapter 1" or a similar indicator in a numbered or lettered sequence. If you have more text following this marker that needs translation or explanation, please provide it so I can assist further!
De cauterizacio de cranc.	This phrase appears to be in an old form of Latin or a related medieval language. It translates to:
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer begins and you want to remove it, then cauterize the area with a circular cautery around it as described.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise say that it should be cauterized with the latter cautery in the middle of the area; but I do not agree with this, for I fear that it might become ulcerated, and I have seen this happen several times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is better that it be cauterized around the area with a circular cautery, as we have said, or with multiple cauteries.
Capitol .li.	Chapter II.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	On the cauterization of abscesses.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When an abscess is delayed in maturation, and this is due to excess fluid or the condition of the patient, who may be old and frail, with little blood, or because of the season, and you wish to hasten the maturation of the abscess; then cauterize around it with small pointed cauteries; and afterward leave it so that it will mature more quickly.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	And if you want to perform the perforation with a cautery, then ignite the cautery which has this form: and place it in the most suitable location for penetration before the skin is pierced.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery in that most suitable location is left there to alleviate the pain of the arm; then treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter II.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	On cautery for corrosive wounds.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrosive is a spreading corruption in the limb, which corrodes it as fire consumes dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you find such a corrosive in an area that can withstand cautery with fire, then ignite a few small and large cautery nails as appropriate for the location where the corrosion is.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then cauterize the area thoroughly until you eradicate all of the corrosion and leave no cause for it to remain.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And then leave it for three days, and apply over the cauterized areas a dressing made with oil mixed until all the scars are removed and all the corruption is eradicated.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And then treat that with flesh-generating ointments.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	And if after about three days the flesh grows healthy without any corruption, that is good; but if not, then reapply the cautery to the areas that are corrupted.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And corrosive treatment is sometimes applied with sharp medicine, for that serves as a substitute for cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, cautery with fire is a quicker method.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already described the treatment with sharp medicine in the section, so use that when you need it.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter LIII.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On the cautery of claws and other similar parts.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Often found in the areas called claws, which are swollen and inflamed parts that affect the foot. Cauterization on these can be done in two ways: with fire cautery and with hot water cautery.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qualisia feyt deferr segon la quantitat laqual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then place that heated cautery on the shoulder, and then rotate your hand with the cautery around the shoulder until the cautery reaches the depth of the shoulder.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And leave that for three days until it begins to sweat (or drain) the arm. 
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And then apply a plaster made from crushed wild mallows mixed with salt, and leave the plaster on that area for one night, because this will help root out its foundations.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with an ointment made from generative flesh until it is healed. 
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if the condition does not convert and you frequently encounter it on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, then you must administer these cautery treatments with water. Take a quill from an eagle or iron or bone of vulture, and place that over the claw; then pour into the quill a small amount of hot water, and hold your hand, and rotate it with the compression of your hand all around, pressing the edge of the quill against the root of the claw; the hot water will find its way through the pores of the claw's root. Let the patient endure the sting of the hot water for an hour, and then remove that, as the claw along with its roots will be eradicated.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And in this way, with those, one approaches the other until you cover all of their parts throughout the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And then treat those pus formations where the roots of the claws have been eradicated using ointments that cause flesh to regrow.
Capitol .liiii.	The text provided appears to be written in an archaic or constructed language that combines elements from Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. The phrase "Capitol .liiii." seems to indicate a chapter or section number (likely chapter 44). Here is the translation:
De cauterizacio de tremor.	From the text provided and its structure, it seems like the language is an archaic form of Romance languages mixed with some Latin influences. Based on this understanding:
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When there is a tremor due to cold in the nerves or by fever of cold origin, or for another similar cause, then you must apply cautery with four or five cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, placing one cautery between each vertebra; and also place a cautery on their feet and over their stomach using olive oil.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the tremor of the patient subsides and hastens the healing of the cold disease.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 5.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	On the cautery of various accidents to the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When there are swellings and pustules on the body, which are formed from thick corrupted materials; therefore, at the beginning when they appear, it is necessary to apply cautery over the head of the fistula with a fine cautery using myrtle twigs, the end of which is extended by fire; or with long razors used in surgery; or with a lens-shaped cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And sometimes the cautery is also applied at the beginning of its expulsion in this manner; and it is not believed to be harmful, and the excess is disrupted by doing this, thus healing from them.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	But however it is necessary that this be done near evacuation with bloodletting. 
Capitol lvi.	Capitol lvi.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Of cautery of blood flow accidentally caused by an artery cut.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Watch out for blood flow from an artery that is cut during the treatment of a wound that leads to swelling or at the beginning of abscesses or cauterization of the limb, and similar situations, as it is difficult to stop it.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore, when this happens to someone, then you should press with your hand on the opening of the artery, and place your finger over it to tightly hold it so that the blood flow stops, ensuring that it does not continue.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	Then place the olive-sized small and large cautery irons into the fire, several times, and blow on them until they are thoroughly heated.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	Then take one of those, either small or large, depending on the location and the wound where the artery is broken, place it over that vein quickly after you have removed your finger, and hold the cautery until it seals and constricts the bleeding.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you remove your finger and withdraw the cautery, then take another heated cautery from those that are prepared in the fire, and continue to do this one after another until the bleeding is stopped.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And be careful not to burn the nerves that are here, and do not bring any other mischief upon the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to stop the bleeding in those cases except by one of four methods: either with a cautery as we have mentioned, or by extraction when it is not extracted, for when it is extracted, the ends of the vessels are burned and the blood flow is restricted, or that it be bound with a thread or with a ligature by strong constriction, or that medicines which have the power to constrict the blood be placed upon it; and they should be compressed with a poultice by proper constriction.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	And he who administers proper constriction by ligature and constriction with bandages or by the position of burning and similar causes, should only apply it slowly.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	But if this happens to someone and the doctor is not present nor medicine available, then press with the index finger on the opening of that vein as we have said, and apply great constriction inside so that the blood stops at the main part of the wound, and do not remove your finger from the artery; and above the artery sprinkle cold water with a very strong degree of coldness until the blood is congealed and thickened; and if cautery or medicine is necessary, use it accordingly.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begin the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	About incision and puncture and cupping and bloodletting and plagues and their equivalents.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are words from Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter about all diseases in which cauterization with fire is appropriate and with combustible medicine, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for them along with the forms of the cauteries; and I have ordered the chapters from the head down to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And I will proceed in this chapter in the same manner, so that the seeker may be relieved concerning what they have asked about.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before I begin this, son, you must understand that in this chapter, what is terrifying here is similar to what is in the first chapter on cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And because great caution is required, for in the operations described in this chapter, many times there is evacuation involving blood, which is essential to life, such as venesection or incision on an abscess, or exposure of a foreign body, or purging of a plague, or extraction of an arrowhead, or removal of a stone and their equivalents.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And with all of these is accompanied fear and trembling, and in the majority of cases, death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that this should not happen to you in which there is danger, because sometimes your ways of treating must be changed due to various diseases. 
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And of them there are some who will die from their illness and this is quick because of the death that follows it, and this due to the intensity of what they find in their sickness, and by the length of their illness, and with the illness comes fear which signifies death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And among those is the one who gives you their possessions and says that you are hoping for health with them, and their illness is deadly.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore you should not consent to those who come to you in this manner; and your caution should be greater than desire and your greed; and do not presume any reason for this except certain knowledge that confirms what you must do, and which by subsequent successful outcome is praised.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	O, sons, God inspire in you His understanding and does not remove direction and protection from you, for this is in His hands.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have ordered this chapter distinguishing by sections according to what was previously covered in the chapter on cauteries, about the treatment from head to foot, so that it may be made easier for you what you ask of this and of which you have need.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	On the treatment of water that is contained in the head of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this disease often occurs due to childbirth and when the wet nurse squeezes the child's head too tightly.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And sometimes it occurs due to hidden causes that are not known.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	But I have only seen this disease in children; and in all those cases, death followed closely, and thus it seems to me that it is a fatal condition for them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and the head of the child was so enlarged that he could not support himself due to the size of his head, and the humidity increased until it caused death.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this humidity is either added between the tendon and the bone, or it settles below the bone on the spine.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	For the operation in that case where the humidity is between the tendon and the bone and the abscess is small, then you must cut at the middle of the head with a slit horizontally, and the length of the slit should be about two fingers so that the humidity can flow out, and this is the form of the spatula.
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And therefore, if the humidity is more increased and the abscess is larger, then there should be two slits according to this method:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the humidity is below the bone, a sign of this is that you see the sutures of the head open in all parts and water is squeezed out when you compress it with your hand on the inner parts, and this was not previously noticed.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	You must cut at the middle of the head with three slits according to this method:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	and then extract all the humidity from it; and then secure the slits with bandages and poultices; and then wash over it with wine and oil until the fifth day, and then remove the binding and treat the wound with lint and ointments, and bind the head evenly; and feed the patient with dry food of little moisture until the member is strengthened and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another method of incision, which you should consider in relation to the magnitude of the abscess and the collection of water, because sometimes it may be more towards the occiput, or in the front part, or on the right side, or on the left; and thus pay attention with the incision where the abscess and the accumulation of water appear, and do this according to what is best possible for you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not cut the artery, so that blood does not flow and the patient does not die from that flow of blood with the evacuation of humidity.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter II.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	On the incision of the arteries that are near the ears, called helixes.
Capitol segon.	Second Chapter.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When catarrh or rheumatism occurs in the eyes or foot, and this has been long-standing, and you do not achieve healing through medical treatments, then the final remedy in this case is to incise those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And thus, when you want to incise those arteries, the patient should raise their head, and then rub the area with a coarse cloth so that the arteries appear, and then tie the neck of the patient tightly with some cloth; and then identify where the pulse is felt; and the locations of each artery are near the ears, though they may be hidden in some people.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then mark the artery with a probe, and then incise each one with an acute spatula reaching through to the bone, and this is done across the width of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you want, insert the spatula under the artery and break it at the points above.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And the length of the incision should be about two fingers wide, because when any vein is cut open, blood flows out with a pulsating exit, which sprays out frequently.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	And if the artery does not appear at the binding site, then you must measure from the earlobe a distance of three fingers' width, and then mark it with a probe, and go into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And what is needed to let blood is a quantity of wine unciae, and strongly from it do not let more or less, and all this is according to the amount that appears of the patient's strength and the fullness of their artery.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then examine the wound, and if there remains any cause of infection on the bone, then cut away that part so that it does not become abscessed with a cautery.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen the wound with poultices and linen bandages, and then treat it with ointments until it heals.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	On the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When an individual suffers from chronic migraines or sharp pains, caused by moistures and qualities in the veins of the temples, or if they are severe and similar to these, and treatment with medical methods does not help, then we resort to extracting the arteries in the temples, or cauterizing them as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the method of the operation and extraction is that the patient shaves the hairs that are in the temples; then locate the visible artery in the temple where it can be shown to you by its pulse, as it is hidden in only a few people due to thick hair.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden from you, then the neck of the patient should be stretched with some cloth; and then rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until the artery appears clearly to you.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And now you take the spatula, which has the following form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you carefully scrape the vein with that instrument until you reach the artery; and then insert it in there and extract it from the superior parts until you remove it from the vein and uncover it from the tunics which are left behind, from all sides.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the artery is delicate, then wrap it with the tip of a needle, and then divide it in part according to the extent to which its ends are elongated and contracted, and there will be no blood flow, for if they are not divided, the blood will not rise fully.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then evacuate one to three ounces of blood.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, then you must tie it at two places with strong double-threaded silk or with long cords, and do not worry about putrefaction before the wound heals and the blood flow stops.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then cut away the excess that is between two ligaments; and do this at that time or around another appropriate time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you want, cauterize that area with a cautery between the bone using a knife-shaped cautery before cutting off the extremities of it, and let it stay in place for the same procedure.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better to perform the procedure when the patient does not have a fever or a hot temperament; for cautery is one of those causes that help to dry out excessive moisture, and therefore it is better in treatment.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And before the extraction of the arteries, fill the area with an old cloth, and place it over the wound properly dressed, then treat it with dry medicines to promote flesh growth and use bandages until it is healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while you are working another time blood flow from the artery starts again, then you must act to stop that bleeding, either by using a cautery or by filling the area with a cloth, and hold your hand firmly until the bleeding is stopped.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if none of those causes is present for you, then place your finger on the spot where the blood has congealed, and apply a cold water compress to the area until the sharp pain subsides, and be firm as needed.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And the lighter method for extracting an artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two blades, since you have marked the two spots with a probe, and then place them, light a fire, until they reach the bone and divide the vein into two places, so that what is between the ends of it is elongated, because they are not fully consolidated by this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And the sharpness of the two blades should be similar.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, if the sharpness of the two blades is less, it is better, because if they are as sharp as two blades close to each other, they will not cut the flesh too quickly.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, since there is some thickness in them, the heat of the fire is retained in them, and the flesh is cut easily.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better than all other works and lighter.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And let the space which is between two ribs be the quantity of the thickness of a finger.
Capitol quart.	Chapter four.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	On the treatment of acute and acidic tears of the eyes.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When those tears are acidic, and it is the condition of those veins which are on top of the head that have become inflamed, and you do not find any cause for medical treatment in this regard, sometimes the face of the patient becomes red, and they feel a tingling sensation on their forehead as if it were an ant's crawl. The eyes themselves become weakened to such an extent that the eyelashes are noticeable, and the eyelids are scratched by the sharpness of the tears. Ancient bitter remedies were used in the treatment of this condition, and I do not name that treatment lightly.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And you command the patient to pluck the hairs that are on their forehead, and then make three incisions in the forehead equally spaced according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the incision is about two fingers: the first incision should be equally distant from the length of the nose at the middle of the forehead, the second according to the length a little past the movement of the eyelashes which are in the lacrimal area, and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And be careful of the beginning of the arteries which are on two sides, and stretch your hand from the continuation of both jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space between each incision is the quantity of three fingers placed together.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a piece of sponge prepared or dry cloths with which to dry the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then insert the spatula with two sharp ends, of which this is the shape of the incision:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	The sentence "que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio" can be broken down and translated as follows:
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Here is the translation of the sentence:
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then stretch this spatula and insert into the first incision another instrument which is called a knife, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And place the sharp edge of that instrument against the attached flesh and on the side of the lion within the bone, and drive it in until it reaches the middle fissure, and with that cut off all the vessels descending from the head to the toes.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	And if the incision needs to be continued on this part of the chain (possibly referring to a specific area or structure), then do this in the middle fissure between another fissure.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And since a considerable amount of blood flows out, press the areas where the clotted blood is located.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	Then place in each crack some old wool, and put over those powders mixed with wine and oil and vinegar, and ensure that it does not develop an abscess due to heat.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day, remove the bandage and administer a strong infusion of hot or warm water, and then treat it with basil ointment mixed with rose oil and other remedies until the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	On the treatment of tears through catharsis and the descent of humors from within the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When there is a good and continuous catharsis occurring, and at times the humors of the patient are weakened slightly, and their vision is already debilitated, and the eyelids are ulcerated and the area around the eyes is inflamed with hair loss, and there is acute pain in the forehead along with subsequent sneezing, you should know from these symptoms that the materials and catharsis do not come but from small veins within these areas.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best treatment for that is this: command the patient to shave their forehead, then make an incision in that area at the center of the forehead, a small one in width (and begin with the fissure from the left temple towards the right temple; and let the incision go through the bone; extend your hand beyond the swollen temples which are affected by chewing), until the bone is exposed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry all the blood with a sponge or with dry cloth and then fill between the two lips of the wound with old wool or cloths.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then apply it with powdered material mixed in wine and oil so that it does not lead to an abscess forming.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you unbind it and see that the abscess has already decreased, then you must rub the area where new flesh begins to grow, and then treat it with a drying regimen that promotes the growth of flesh, just as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix them together, and from these an ointment is made and applied to these areas for the nativity of the flesh.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	On the treatment of what affects the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	All causes that affect the ears are of four types: either it is a mineral stone or something similar to a stone, such as iron or glass; or it is from a plant, such as sesame or bean; or it is a fluid cause, such as acidic water and vinegar and their likes; or some kind of small creature.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And therefore, when a stone enters the ear or another similar cause from those causes that do not fit or grow in the ear, and expose the ear to the sun, if you find the stone, then distill some substance of violet oil or sesami into it, and then administer its extract, and make them sneeze with condizi, and plug the nostrils before the sneezing occurs.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then place some pieces of cloth or wool around the earlobe, and stretch the earlobe upwards to the points where warts have appeared, because warts are often caused by these reasons.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not expelled, then administer extraction from them with the instrument called subtlety of epicyclical gestures of which this is the form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is treated with gestures, that is good; and if not, then administer the extraction of it using an ounce of finely ground powder.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And if it is not caused by that, then make a cannula of iron and insert the end of the cannula into the ear canal, and seal around the cannula with wax and softened oil so that only the cannula remains open.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	Then extract with your breath using strong suction, for it helps greatly as we have recounted.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	But if it is not resolved in this manner, then take some frankincense or similar prepared substance with which birds are caught in small quantities, and place that at the end of the ear, and then wrap something over it properly.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	Then insert that into the ear canal easily, and then dry the ear of its moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And if it is not resolved by all the methods we have described, then you must consider incising that area before it develops into an abscess or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	The method of incising that area is to first bleed the patient from the saphenous vein and extract blood according to the patient’s strength, then grasp the earlobe between your fingers and turn the ear upwards, and finally make a small incision at the edge of the earlobe, removing the pus from the deeply pressed area.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And if the crack of a lunar shape reaches to the stone, and once the stone is found, remove it with appropriate instruments; then quickly close the crack at that moment, and care for it until it is healed.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause for the issue in the ear is one of the growths that have grown and become inflamed, then administer its treatment and extraction; but if it does not respond to this approach, then take a thin, delicate spatula according to this method:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and use it to remove the growth that has occurred in the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not perform this when you think it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear. Place it in several small pieces, and then extract them with tweezers or delicate movements, or by incision as we have said, for the extraction is easier this way.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	However, when water has entered the ear, the patient should start with a sneeze under certain conditions, and fill their ear with some old cloth, and jump on the ear that contains the water; if it is thus expelled, it is good. If not, then take thin stone rods and levers according to the length of a finger, heat them slightly over fire, and have the patient insert one of these into the opening of their ear, jump a bit from that side, and strike the stone inside the ear with another stone.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Therefore, do not stop until all the water has been completely removed.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And already the water should be poured in such a way that you take paper or reed, and put one end of it into the ear and extend the other end with fire until its middle part is burned.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And then introduce another syringe and do this so many times until all the water is extracted, and squeeze that with a cannula as was said above about the stone extractor.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	Here is the translation line by line:
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	And in the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, when you treat it as we have said in the section and in the treatment of distillations and do not complete your cure, then you must look at the ear to the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And therefore if any sign of worms appears here, then extract them with gestures or with fine needles; but if no cause appears, then take a tube that is narrow at one end and wide at the other, which has this form:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the thin extremity into the ear according to the amount that the patient can tolerate; and then suck with that through strong suction, and do this multiple times until all the worms have been expelled.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	And if you do not obey the instructions, then plug and seal the tube's circuit with wax as we have said; then administer distillates that have already proven effective in the treatment of worms, and you will find this in the section on distillates.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let your effusion be with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear using this instrument, which has the following form:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make it of silver or ceramic, leaving it straight, with a small tube in which there is a flat surface on top.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And thus it should be designed to fit into the cavity of the tube that will be necessary for containment.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you want, take the rod and wrap the end of it with a small piece of cloth, then pour oil into the concavity of the ear or juice from some herb, or any of these medicines into the tube — which is in the ear — and then insert the wrapped rod into the ear and press gently with your hand to force the oil into the ear's cavity so that the patient feels the oil inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And that which is inserted into the ear should already be slightly warmed by fire.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And be careful that the substance you will instill into the ear is not too cold, for medicines for the ear do not tolerate that.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the treatment of ear blockage.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Sometimes, some children are born with unperforated ear drums from their mothers, and this can also happen to adults; blockage in the ear canal due to plaque or excess flesh in that area. This blockage sometimes occurs in the anterior part of the ear canal which does not allow sound through, and at other times it is on the outer parts.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which occurs in the anterior part of it, which does not allow sound through, is often in a more difficult condition to heal.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in the case where sound is perceived, you should expose the patient's ear to the sun and observe it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And therefore, if an obstruction appears, open it with a fine spatula of this form:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the extremity of it in which the width is small, one part being sharp and the other not; and the spatula be two-sided like a lion so that it does not injure the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And therefore, if the obstruction is due to flesh grown in the ear or on it, then take that with fine needles and cut out that flesh with great ease until all of the flesh is removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if there is obstruction in the ear canal, then take a thin piece of wool and warm it slightly over fire, and then insert it into the ear canal.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And therefore, if you find that the patient breathes easily with this [method], due to the gravity of exhaling, it alleviates the pressure on them easily; and be careful not to harm the nerves in the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then place in the ear a piece of cloth of the same size as the width of the tube that you have wrapped with Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or take some wax, boil it in water, powder it over the crushed and sieved area and use it; and if you find the ear already abscessed, then you must remove the wax and replace it with another piece of wax that you will wrap in cerot made with rose oil, until the abscess begins to soften; and then care for it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	But if there is a flow of blood, then soak a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use another treatment that stops the flow of blood, which is described in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	The text you provided appears to be in an old Romance language that combines elements of Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Here is a translation of the given line:
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	For the treatment of athelzil, which occurs in the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore, you must hold those with tweezers or with an ounce, and cut them away from their roots with a knife, and then place something over the cut areas.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	And if pain with a flow of blood occurs, then you cauterize those areas with a subtle lens-shaped cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is performed near the incisions and observed blisters when there remains any cause of the eruptions; and when they are cauterized with fire, those eruptions are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment for swelling that occurs in the eyelids.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Small swellings often appear in the eyelids due to some cause which resembles swelling in its strength and hardness, and thus the swelling is called by this name.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an accumulation of thick moisture beneath and above the eyelid.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the procedure for it is to consider whether the swelling is occurring in such a way that it appears from the eyelid and is soft all around; and the cause of it is slight.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore, make an incision across it along its width, and then drain it completely from all sides until it dries out, and then suture it with a needle and close it.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if you are not prepared at the start of the procedure and have to penetrate the eyelid gradually with an incision, then this should cause no concern.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the wound is large, then you adjust it with stitching; and care for that inside until it heals. 
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, you will not suffer harm from that because the heat of it restores that area and causes flesh to grow.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the swelling is declining towards the inner parts of the eyelid, you should turn inside the eyelid and suspend the swelling with an ounce, starting from where you determine initially, and press that area all around; and if the eyelid at first is elongated, this does not matter in any way.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	Then at the beginning, wash the wound with salt water; and treat the area with something that causes flesh to grow until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	On the treatment of swelling above the eyelid over the eye.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Swelling is a gray substance that is generated in the tissues of the upper eyelid, and it mostly affects children. It aggravates the eyes of those affected and often occurs during summer; they cannot look at the brightness of the sun because tears accumulate in their eyes due to this.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And therefore you often find them lying on their faces all the time, and they sleep with their faces down; and so at the eyelids of their eyes, the eyebrows are wet, which have already been covered by swelling, and an indication of cataract is apparent in the eye; and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel a hardness inside them.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And some method of operation is as follows: the patient places his head on your lap, and then you place a cloth over both of you and make it warm, and create a circle according to the quantity which contains arthernach (likely an archaic term for a substance or ingredient) from all sides, and then place that over it and press with your thumbs all around so that arthernach is aggregated in the middle of the circle, and then introduce moisture into the center of that using a spatula inserted lengthwise through a slit, and the slit should not be larger than the one made in flaubotomy (likely an archaic surgical procedure).
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	Here is the translation of the provided line:
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Therefore, extract that with cloths which you have wrapped around the areas mentioned on the outside and pass between your right and left hand until it is dispersed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be careful not to insert too deeply with the spatula so that you do not reach the bone and displace it.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	And if the artery does not appear to you at the beginning of the fissure, then place a small piece in the fissure with ease before the artery emerges; and then extract that as we have said; and then apply cloth soaked in warm water and sweet wine over the area and press them with powder.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And so, they use salt that is placed and left in the cavity of the fissure so that it can remove that moisture.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that inside so it may heal.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	And if you encounter an abscess in that area, then treat it with soft plasters until it heals.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	On methods of touching the stomach.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When thick hairs grow on the eyelids of the eyes, different from natural hairs and old, these cause harm to the eye and lead to various diseases such as constant tearing and softening of the eyelids and conjunctiva, which can result in the destruction of the eye, a condition called entropion. This is treated in four ways: by cauterization with fire; by sharp medicines as mentioned before in the chapter on cauteries; by surgically correcting and suturing; or by using cannulas, which I will explain.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	Therefore, you must hold the head of the patient still; then turn the eyelid with your left hand. If it turns easily, that is good; if not, insert a needle into the area where there is pus below the eyelid, and push the needle through with thread near the margin of the eyelid where the hairs grow, close to the hairs. Pull the thread up toward the upper part with the eyelid and turn it back in place.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then insert into the part inside the eyelid with the hairs aligned using a spatula from the larger lacrimal duct into the smaller one; and then extract the bile and place small particles of cotton or cloth on the eyelid; and then sew over the eyelid with thread, and it should be thus as in the figure of a myrtle leaf.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	But however it is necessary that the figure according to the amount of elevation of the eyelid be considered, for this already varies among people, for some require a large quantity to be cut from the eyelid according to the extent to which the eyelid has become droopy.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	Then place the spatula over the two lines that you have marked, and begin from the larger tear duct towards the smaller one.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your incision is close to the natural hairline, just as it is for most of the king's [patients]. 
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then insert the needle into one of the two angles of the chain, and then scrape that entire area, and then adjust with a stitch the two lips with thread or fine wool glue, and clean the blood, and make adhere what is superfluous from the glues over both eyebrows with some viscous causes, if you want to do this, and if not, don't worry about it.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And then remove the suture of the glues within three or four days, and then take care of it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you want, leave the wound without suture, and care for it with things that dry and constrict, because the eyelid being raised requires the sealing of the wound and the addition of something; however, suturing is better. Therefore, this is what the ancients taught about treating such conditions.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	However, one must be careful with the patient, and it is of good practice, and not out of fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another method in surgery, which involves shaping the eyelid like a myrtle leaf, and then lifting the eyelid with three separate needles arranged in this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	If it is not possible to do that, hold the hooks, and if this is not aligned, then take a needle with thread and insert it in the middle of the figure, and place the other thread near the larger lacrimal duct, and the second thread near the smaller lacrimal duct, adjust between those threads equally, and then with those lift your hand with equal elevation, lift all the chain on which is marked as we have recommended.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then bring together the two lips of the wound with suture, and treat the inside so that it heals.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	And if an abscess occurs at your incision or your fissure, treat that abscess with poultices and the like, and with ointments.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And sometimes you may encounter an eyelid where the hairs are inverted; then you must use what we have mentioned about incision there; however, in some cases, suturing is more refined.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	To cauterize with cans (reeds) follows this method:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And it is that you turn the eyelid inside out and split the structure within as I have described; then, make two reeds or two fine strips whose length should be according to the length of the eyelid and their width should be half the width of the spatula.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already made incisions at the ends of each section where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then add each one with subtlety over what is superfluous on the eyelid of the eye, and constrict the reeds of each section with strong pressure, and leave it that way for several days, because the bond will die due to the constriction, become detached, and fall off on its own.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	And if it is delayed, then break it at the bones, and then treat the wound until it heals.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Therefore, when it is secured, the eyelid is lifted and the hairs do not poke.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the form of two canes which you will make according to this design:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and there should be the quantity of the length and the width neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	On the removal of stubborn hairs piercing the skin with a needle when the hair is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When there are unnatural, hard, rough, and piercing hairs on the skin, then the procedure is that you take a fine needle and insert it into some fine linen or silk, and then carefully adjust the ends of the needle and hold each one subtly in your fingers.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And let the length of the threads be the quantity of one palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then you place another fine thread under it in ointment, and hold the ends of that thread if you wish.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then place the patient's head on your lap, and bring them close to the light so that your work may be clear, for it is a delicate and precise operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then insert the needle into the root of the hair that requires treatment, and make it penetrate quickly into the eyelid before removing it from the natural hair.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull the hair up and insert it into the eyelash area, and let the hairs be one or two or three, not more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand with it until the hair is moved into the eyelash area on the eyelid along with the natural hair.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	But if the eyelash area is pulled and the hair is not moved, pull the eyelash area to the sides with the solution that you have prepared, until the hair is embedded into the desired place in the eyelash area.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And cover it with the vision of the eye, for when you move the eyelashes and the solution, grow everything and seal the eye, and leave the seals for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place and grows on that good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the hair is shorter, then you attach a long natural hair, and lift it with that, or let it be within so that it is stretched out to some space, and then you elevate it.
Capitol .xiii.	The text appears to be in an archaic form of a Romance language with influences from Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Given this context, let's translate the provided line:
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	For the given sentence:
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When the eye exhibits spasms, and it is a contraction of the eyelid when it contracts inward or to one side, either right or left, due to poor healing from wounds, burns, or cautery, and this condition is called "leporina," and this spasm can be natural or accidental, and it is caused by improper healing from wounds, burns, or cautery, or by similarity to such maladies.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The method of the operation is that you cut through that area of improper healing and separate the lips there, and place a piece of linen cloth in between them, and tie them together until they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And it is not necessary to treat it with methods that dry out the causes forcefully; for if you do this, the spasms will return worse than they were at any time before.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use methods that soften the area, such as fenugreek. Fumigate with water in which fenugreek seeds are boiled, or use an unguent of daturia, which should be liquefied with some oils, and soak the cloth in this mixture, then treat the area with it.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your cure is that you should pierce with any instrument that is not consolidated according to the form that fire at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation that we have mentioned is nothing but some correction of dislocation that does not return the area to its original form as it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Here is the translation of the provided line:
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This inflammation which is made in the lower eyelid, which is properly called stye; and it can be of a natural origin or an accidental one.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	And an accident is caused by a blow or by a cut or by cautery or by other similar causes.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the method of the operation is that you take a needle with double thread, and insert it into the flesh, making it pass from the left tear duct to the right tear duct, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then extend the flesh at the points above with the needle and pierce it with the needle, and cut with a wide spatula.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And then return the shape of the eyelid as needed; if not, take the reed and place it in the cut shape, and use that to turn the eyelid, creating the two slits on the side of the eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And let the ends of the two slits be at two angles of the incision that you have made where they converge, and from them form an angle such that when they come together, a figure is formed.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is the Greek letter: lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then remove the flesh in the amount that is the width of the sharp object left behind, which is the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then align the separated parts and sew them together with wool thread; then treat them with what we have mentioned of the mollifying medicines and the warm compresses until it is healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if you need to make an incision due to a fissure or suture or cautery, then you must make a flat incision on the skin of the eyelid as required.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate with a warm compress between the two lips as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In summary, regarding the treatment of incisions that are above or below, which occur during the operation, according to the form in which the incision is prepared, and that form varies in different ways.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skilled artisans always prepare in each manner that is possible for them until they restore the figure to its natural form or close to it, and they do so according to what is most suitable for the patient regarding the operation and the instruments in their best conditions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	From the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation occurs in many men, you will find that the upper eyelid is adhered to the white part of the eye, and it is restricted from easy movement and its natural functions; therefore, you must insert the tip of a probe under the eyelid, lift it up or extend it with a hook.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	Then you should cut the adhesion with a fine spatula, which should not be sharp for incisions but slightly blunt so that the patient is not disturbed during the operation, and use the spatula in such a way that its sharpness does not harm the eye.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And your incision should be such that it easily removes the adhesion, so that the eyelid returns to its natural form and the entire adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	Then you should put salty water into the eye with which you wash it; or distill juniper dissolved in water onto it.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	Then separate the eyelid from the eye with goose fat, and place wool soaked in chicken egg white on the eye; after three days, use consolidating treatments until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Capitol .xvi.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	From the inflammation of the eyelid and the prominence of flesh around the tear ducts.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that the eyelid is considered in two ways: either it is nervous, and it resembles a hard yet subtle membrane; or it is non-nervous, resembling white frozen moisture, which when touched with an iron tool, if forced to take hold of it, breaks off and the tool does not penetrate it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both of these conditions do not begin except from the major tear duct, which gradually covers the sight and prohibits light and the movement of the eyelid.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	However, the method of treating the inflammation is that the patient places their head on your lap, then opens their eyes, and you lift the eyelid with your hand, and then grasp the eyelid with a small doubly-bent tool and extend it upwards.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	Then take a needle and insert a horsehair or ox hair or cow hair, or something similar, or strong thread, or double the end of the needle little by little and place it in the middle of the eyelid, penetrate it with the needle, and secure the eyelid with thread; extend it upwards, and use the hair to pull out the part of the eyelid that touches the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And in this way you should follow that by inserting the tool into the rear of him.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then you incise the remainder at the base of the tear duct with a fine spatula or small scissors, and clear the flesh around the natural tear duct so that from this incision there will not be continuous flow of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the nail is removed with the sun one inch extended or with sulfur, as we have said, and then it should be extracted with a lion-shaped spatula, which has this form:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And be careful that with the spatula you do not touch the corneal membrane and cause a rupture, and that the pupil is not perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then, put a little finely ground salt or powdered cinnamon into the nose, and leave it there until the next day; then treat it with what is necessary until it heals.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the nail is not loose and you cannot insert the needle, nor can it be fixed in that way, then this kind of nail problem is treated with medicines and is healed as stated and detailed in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to incise that area, then open the nostril of the patient and take a sharp, slender spatula shaped like this:
am subtilitat.	with subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if it happens that it is rarefied and confused and you need to address this issue, then apply a distillation of your own urine mixed with powdered cinnamon or roasted cinnamon or finely ground salt into the nostril, and leave it there until the next day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat the operation until everything that is harmful to him is removed, but rather let any opposing abscess be cauterized on the skin, because when you leave it there and treat the initial abscess until it is healed. 
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat your operation on that area until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The prominence of the lacrimal flesh, if noted in the nose for great harm, should be suspended with an ounce; and incise that from one side, and do not complete the incision so that you do not cut into the tear ducts.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then drip into the lacrimal duct a strong decoction until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	On the incision of a sty and what is born from tight flesh in the nose.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Sometimes on the eyes of some individuals, hard flesh grows and covers the pupil, or approaches and presses tightly against the eyelids, drawing them outward at certain points and joining them to the edge like a railing.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	The operation involves the patient placing their head on your shoulder; then open their eyes and gather all that hard flesh using appropriate tweezers or forceps; then incise the flesh at its beginning until it is all finished with the scalpel, being careful not to harm the eye during your procedure.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And let your incision be with the scalpel which you use to incise those areas or with the knife that we have recommended in the section on the nail, or with small scissors with which mustard is collected according to how it will come into form near this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	When your incision is complete and all that flesh has been sutured, now fill the wound with finely ground salt, or sprinkle on it red powder resembling corrosive medicines, and place over the wound externally a piece of cloth soaked in egg white until it is ensured free from inflammation.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if any cause for watchfulness remains and the bleeding is copious, and you fear an abscess may form, then leave the wound open and treat that abscess with whatever relieves it, and then repeat over it as needed until it is healed, and similarly deal with the flesh attached where this type of wound occurs.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	However, you must ensure that all treatment of the wound is done either by natural means or accidentally through the use of tools, and do not put your hand into any of these procedures until you see that the member can sufficiently endure such an operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	On the collection of blood in the wound.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Blood comes from toughened veins which lie over the wound and hinder proper treatment, and it can prolong the healing of the wound for many days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, at the beginning, it is necessary that you determine if the wound in which there is blood is strong and there is no other illness besides the blood, then you should collect that blood.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And you command the patient to rest their head on your thigh, and then suspend those veins with an ounce or two according to your judgment; and let that ounce be of fine twofold according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	Or use two ounces gradually in one course according to this method:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And then gather those veins with fine threads carefully, and wipe the blood little by little until you see those veins become free of mucus and are turned inside out.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And be careful not to lead the mucus with the tips of the spatula; and if your operation is in the middle of the day under the sun, be firm in your operation so that you only incise those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed this, then distill into the mucus some clear or red liquid so that its acidity can corrode what is stuck from the scab.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	But if you cannot gather everything in that hour, then apply a plaster with something that reduces the pain, and leave it for several days until the pain is subdued and to ensure there is no risk of abscess.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat the same procedure on the second area until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form of the forceps:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	For the reduction of nasal fractures.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat abscesses with cautery or sharp medicine according to what was previously stated in the narration and it is not healed, then do not generate anything inside him but rather make incisions over the abscess until its maturity, and extract all the moisture that is within it along with the pus so that the bone is uncovered.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then when the bone is uncovered and there is corruption or blackening in it, then scrape it with an instrument that has the following form: 
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place that over the corrupted area of the bone, then rotate it between your fingers, and press your hand little by little until you know that the corruption is scraped away.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And this should be done several times, and then restore the area with drying and styptic causes.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Therefore, if the area is consolidated and good flesh has formed and the body has separated from the pus and remains so for forty days, and it does not recur, and there is no abscess and no accidents occur, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, then the goal is not to generate anything but to reduce the fracture to its original form, and according to this method: you must expose the bone using fire or sharp medicine, and once the bone is exposed, take a splint in the following manner:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The tip of the iron should be triangular, and the shaft should be gradually tapered towards the end in such a way.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And then place that over the bone, near the lacrimal area; extend your hand slightly from the wound, and then rotate your hand with the splint until it penetrates the entire bone, causing the patient to feel some air escaping when you hold their hand.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore, now restore the area with astringent and drying medicines as has been mentioned.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Therefore, when the flesh and the area have hardened, the material that was flowing out to the outer parts returns inward, thus this makes the condition lighter on the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	On the reduction of a protrusion in the eye.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the eye protrudes entirely and does not result in any damage or reduction to the vision, then you should first relax the patient, and subsequently apply bloodletting at the neck with scarification and good suction; and then place an ointment over the eye that is made from acacia, aloe, honey, and tragacanth, and finally secure the poultice on the eye with powdered lint.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the method for the lint is to take linen cloths and cut them into pieces, and each piece should be folded into four layers; and make use of those cut pieces.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then place those one over the other according to the amount that the wound needs.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And then press on those with a hard cloth with strong binding; and repeat the cupping with suction and scarification; and then remove the cups and leave the wound exposed day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if the bandage becomes softened, then it must be made tight again.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And then remove the bandage day and night as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if you find the wound already reduced, it is good, and if not, then repeat the poultice with the powders and binding and cupping until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	On the incision of the uveal part of the eye.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is disruption in the uveal part of the eye and it becomes prominent and protrudes from the eyelids like a grape of raisin, and takes on the shape of a human figure due to this, and you want to incise this, then the operation is as we have recounted: you insert the needle at the base of the uvea from below upwards, and then place another double-threaded needle in the lacrimal part, and make that penetrate while keeping the first needle in its position; and then incise the area where the double thread is located and lift with it the part of the uvea around the circumference of the needle, and press it firmly.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then remove the needle and place over the wound wool infused in egg white, and leave until the thread comes out with the grape.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then treat the wound with something that strengthens it internally so that the ailment may be healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And sometimes, gather from all sides with a circle of cloth around the swollen wound, and then pierce it with a fine spatula to reach the core of the wound, allowing the whitish moisture to flow out, and reduce the swelling, making it subside immediately.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen it internally so that it may heal.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio de alconati.	On the treatment of hernias.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This illness, which is called hernia, is nothing but a swelling that appears in the groin, resembling descending water, but it is not that.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The method of treating it is to have the patient sit on a prepared and straight chair. Then take his head in both of your hands and press internally where you see the swelling coming out on either side. Then dry it so that it does not descend, and leave it like this, with the patient seeing the causes just as they appeared.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not descend downward, know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	And if the pus does not drain properly as we have said, then place the patient between your hands and take a fine spatula, and use it to separate the panniculus from the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corneal tunic at the margin (inside the eye socket), until the pus is completely expelled.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Once it is completely expelled, then you should instill warm water into the nose, in which you have mixed honey, or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then it should be treated with other methods until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the treatment of water (discharge) descending from the nose.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already mentioned the types of discharge in the division and which ones require piercing with clear explanation, according to the health condition.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Now you must place the patient between your hands on a chair and tie their nose tightly with a binding agent.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And then place your left hand near the eyelid of his eye if the affected eye is the left one; or use your right hand if the eye is the right one.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And then use your right hand to take an almond if the eye is the left one; or use your left hand if the eye is the right one.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And then place the tip of the almond near the crown along the thickness of the ray in the white part of the eye near the smaller tear duct, and then apply the almond with force and rotate your hand in that manner.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then penetrate into the white part of the eye and feel that the almond has already reached the desired location.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And it is necessary that the length of the path of the almond to the front be the same as the distance from the pupil to the end of the black part, which is the crown of the eye; for you will see the pupil with the vision of the eye through the clarity of the cornea.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And then place the almond in the location where the fluid is, and then pull it down once and then again; if the fluid descends quickly, you will see the patient regain their sight immediately, with the almond still in their eye. 
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then rest for a while; if the water has drained down, then you wait another interval before any ointment is applied.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And then when it is cut and does not descend, you extract the ointment easily, and rotate your hand slowly with that; then dissolve a little clear gem salt in water and wash the hole inside with it; then place outside of the hole a plug or stopper or wool soaked in anointed oil and egg white and glue with this the hole shut.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	But we and those of our time place upon that wound something crushed with egg white.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the ointment does not adhere to the interior of the wound due to its hardness—since there are some people for whom the wound is very hard—then you must take the spatula named alberid, which has the following form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And then pierce that joint with it, and do not keep your hand in the wound for too long, but only make a fine place for the ointment.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then insert the suppository as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And complete your work by preparing the patient's sleeping area properly, in which they should sleep on their back in a dark room, and all movements are prohibited.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And pause to understand the nature of the condition so that you can align their natural state, and do not turn their head to the right or left at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And apply the dressing according to its preparation within the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then remove that [likely referring to a dressing or bandage] in that dark room and expose it to fresh air, and show him some causes [possibly referring to explaining the reasons], and then reapply the dressing within seven days.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And it is not necessary to do this during the time of treatments or right before the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	However, it is necessary that you dilute this so that the water can gently pass through, considering it is strong and potent.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	But if an abscess forms and you need to cauterize it, then you must remove the dressing before the seventh day, and treat it with something that reduces the abscess.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And then it is gently lowered from that position and turned onto its causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in surgery it is not exempt for the student to see certain things several times, and then you must be bold during the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And it has been reported to us by some of those who are in the Artach, and some said that fire is made in an Ayrac vessel which is pierced so that water is sucked up.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	But however I have not seen anyone in our land who has perfected this, nor have I read this in any of the books of the ancients; and it is possible that this is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of medicines for which it is upon those who ignore them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And let them be made of iron or of proper steel, and let the extremities of them have this triangular subtlety, the sharp end thus as that is the form.
Capitol .xxiv.	Capitol .xxiv.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	Of the treatment of flesh hanging from the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When on the nose there are various growths of flesh, some of which are caused by a mixture similar to moist scabs or nasal polyps; and this illness is called polypus because it resembles that type of growth.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And if it is cancerous flesh, it appears pale and of a dark color; and if it is non-cancerous flesh, it is not of a dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in those cases where the flesh is not fraudulent nor cancerous, you should have the patient sit between your hands and expose them to the sun, clean their nostrils, and pierce the area with a needle in those fleshy parts.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	Then extract it from the outer parts, and then divide what you have grasped of those areas with a sharp and fine spatula inserted into one part until you know that all the flesh has been removed; because if any part remains which could cause separation to be possible, then you scrape it with one of the fine instruments easily until nothing remains that could cause any issue.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	If it is ruled by blood or an abscessed swelling appears, then you apply what is necessary; if it is one of the malignant swellings, then you cut and cauterize that area where blood needs to be severed and all the veins removed.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And then pour into the nose near the beginning something agreeable and mixed with water or wine.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	But if the nose is open and you process humidity into the palate from it, then know that it is already healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	But if the humidity does not penetrate as it should, then you know that inside there is flesh mixed with pus over the bones of the nose to which incision has not been successful.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore, now it is necessary to insert a thread into the nose where there is some thickness, and place crushed nuts on it, placing between each nut an amount equal to the width of a finger or thumb, and prepare the patient and insert one end of the thread into the nose with the aid of a reed or another suitable instrument.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And after this has been done, draw his own odor inward so that it reaches the nasal passages, and sit on his pillow, for children often mimic this action at school, and it is an easy method for those who wish to perform it. 
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then place the two ends of the splint, one end that comes over the nose and the other that remains on the nose, and then apply a suturing of flesh with the knots that are in the splint, and do this until you know that the flesh is already secured with the knots of the splint. 
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then extract the bile, and place near the nostrils during bloodletting a sponge, and do this for three days or more until the poultice corrodes all that is rotten in the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And at the end of the treatment, place a lead cannula in the nose for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	And if you finish the treatment and it dries up, use that method. 
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument used for purging with which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And do this with silver or amber, which should resemble a small open lantern, like a little shell, and the meat similarly.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you want to, make a closed tube like a cane, and the part of the instrument for purging should be open and flat; which should be placed at the back of the patient, with which you hold it when you heat it in oil or whatever other substances and suctionable causes you wish.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these capipurgi are precious: take castoreum, white balm, ginger, saffron crocus, long pepper, scammony, and thyme in equal parts by the uncia (ounce). Mix them with the juice of leek and onion, make pills from them, dissolve one pill in warm water, and administer it into the nostrils of the patient lying down.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	About nasal polyps in the outer parts of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	White spots appear as polyps in the outer parts of the nose, and they grow and change within a few days, during which time their condition should be monitored.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And because of this, you should incise it at the beginning of its appearance and remove all of it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Then place a cautery or a burning medicine on the area where it was removed.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	But if the incision is delayed until it has grown larger, then consider whether it has become calcified, hard, dark in color, and less sensitive. In this case, do not touch it with iron, for it may be a chronic abscess; because sometimes one who incises such an abscess can cause great harm to the area that was affected.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the abscess is of a light touch and not of a dark color, and when incision is possible in all of it, then evacuate the patient and incise that without fear, and treat the area with something that dries and constrains until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	It seems like you've provided a section marker or chapter title from an old text, specifically ".xxvi." which in Roman numerals translates to "26". This likely denotes the 26th chapter or section of a document. If you have more content that follows this marker and requires translation or explanation, feel free to share it! Otherwise, if you need further context or details about how such numbering was used historically, let me know.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	On缝合鼻子、嘴唇和耳朵当它们因伤或类似原因而断裂。
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Understand that when you encounter a rupture of continuity in one of these cartilages, you should not place much confidence in that operation unless it is in certain men.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when you encounter any cause of those wounds, you should consider if it is a fresh wound with its own blood, and then you align the two edges of the wound with sutures, and then care for the inside so that it heals.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the edges of the wound that has broken continuity are already separated and each is made whole, then you must pull each part of its visible stitches until blood comes out.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two lips with sutures and tighten them, and sprinkle dragon's blood powder on them which you have ground finely, and place over the powder a piece of diafinicon plaster, or some other consolidating plaster, and leave that bandage for two days or three, and then remove it and replace that plaster until the stitches fall off by themselves, and finally care for it with ointment until it is healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	And the method of suturing is that you close the discontinuity with needles as we have recommended in the suturing of the abdomen, or you can also close the discontinuity with stitches as you know how to do.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	On the extraction of those causes that occur in the two lips within the partitions.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Often observed in some men within the partitions of their lips are hard swellings resembling lard, and some of these are smaller while others are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, you must turn the lips and separate each of those hard swellings entirely, and then fill the space left by their removal with ground sage until the blood is constricted. Then wash it with sweet wine and treat the area with a styptic agent until it is healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	Capitol .xxviii.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	From the insertion of the flesh fitted into the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	There are many swamps above the flesh fitted into the gums, which the ancients called alveoli. Therefore, you must suspend it with a hook or hold it with forceps and incise its root, allowing the pus or blood to flow.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	Then apply over the area some triassatum or other styptic or cicatrizant powders.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then incise it again and cauterize it, because after the cautery it will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	On the extraction of teeth with force.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth, both those inside and outside, and between the gums, there are sharp splinters, tartar, and some swamps that are blackened or yellowish-green, this leads to corruption in the gum and causes the teeth to become decayed.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And thus it is necessary that you seat the patient between your hands and place his head on your thigh, and scrape the teeth in which you find those scales and cause similarities to sand so that none of these causes remain, and this is done for the blackness and yellowness and other things so that they may be cleansed.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Therefore, if what is at the beginning of the reasoning remains true; good. And if not, then you repeat the reasoning on those things on another day and on the second and on the third until it comes to the final statement in which you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And know that teeth require various forms and many shapes of forceps according to what is prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And therefore, the razor with which the tooth is cut from inside is different from the razor used to cut between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of razors you should prepare, which you will see soon:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter .xxx.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	For the eradication of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	More importantly, when the patient is forced to have that tooth removed, you must be certain which one is causing pain, because often the pain can deceive the patient and lead them to believe a healthy tooth is the source. If you remove that one and the pain does not stop until the diseased and painful tooth is extracted, for we have already seen this through barber surgeries.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, you must be certain which tooth is causing pain, and once you know this well, then you need to scrape around the tooth with a spatula that has some medicinal power, until it separates from the gum completely. Then remove it using your fingers or with fine scissors bit by bit until it comes out.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then take large forceps with good gripping power or strong pliers, and hold the patient's head between your knees so that you have a firm grip and it does not move, and then pull the tooth straight out in such a way that you do not break it nor cause greater pain to the patient.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And if it is not easily removed, then take one of those instruments and gently remove it from all sides, exerting effort to extract it in the same manner as at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is loose or decayed, then you must wrap a piece of cloth around the loose part and tighten it with the tip of a fine probe so that it does not break when you apply pressure to it with forceps.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And it is necessary that you perform carefully with scarification around all parts of the gum and be mindful of your strength so as not to tear that part and leave a wound, and return to the patient for the harm to be less severe than the initial pain.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And be careful not to do what some ignorant barbers do in their stubbornness and audacity regarding the removal of them; for they often bring severe illnesses upon men which are harder to treat, and the roots of which remain unhealed, or that you extract it along with some bones of the jaw as we have testified many times.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And then for the extraction of it, the mouth should be washed with hot wine or sour wine with salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if bleeding occurs because of this, just as it sometimes happens unexpectedly, then sprinkle some amount of zaugy (a kind of medicinal substance) on the wound, and if that zaugy does not work, apply a cautery.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The form of the forceps and delicate tongs with which a tooth is extracted should be long at the end, short in manipulation, and thick, so that they do not bend when using them for this task.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And they should be thick in the middle so that when you exert force with them, they do not bend, and their ends should be short.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And they should be made of Indian iron, properly fashioned with straight ends, and at the ends of these, there should be teeth that fit into each other and exert force through strong constriction. Sometimes, the ends of these are in the shape of the beak of a bird called ciconia, which is a stork, and they have a powerful constricting ability.
Capitol .xxxi.	Capitol .xxxi.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	For the eradication of teeth and extraction of the bones of the jaw that are trapped.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need to extract a broken tooth that has some root remaining, then it is necessary for you to place over the area a poultice made of bread for one or two days until the area is softened; and then insert forceps or pliers with ends shaped like the beak of a bird called stork or vulture, which is the form of the forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The extremities of their limbs should be treated thusly like a file or an emery board.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you do not obey the sensation with these forceps or tongs, then you must cut into the root and peel away all the flesh and insert the instrument called an atalí, which is a small lever of this form:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And let one end be a small thick part, and it should not be inserted too deeply so that it is not broken. 
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	So if by this the urine is forcefully expelled, it's good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is triangular at the tip, in which there should be some thickness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second instrument is that it should be triangular and have a finer tip.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And already with this instrument, which has two prongs, the form of which is as follows:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	and with other instruments which precede in the scraping of teeth; for it is often done with this instrument which resembles a large needle, and this is its form:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	the curved or short triangular tip, which should be of some thickness, and not too fragile so that it does not break.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And you should know that the instruments for moving teeth are also similar to other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	But the skilled and subtle artisan in the art can find by themselves according to what the operation and diverse diseases indicate; for there are diseases for which the ancients did not describe or leave proper instruments, due to the varied forms of different kinds.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the jawbone or other bones of the mouth are fractured, or if you need to, then set the bone back in its place using what is appropriate from the instruments and forceps which we have mentioned in the extraction of tooth roots, and assist with gestures, the form of which is as follows:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And if there is any small swelling in it, and it should be compressed or held by the mouth so that it does not escape or flee before all the pus has been expelled; then restore the area with appropriate medicines.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if there is a small ulcer in the bone, then scrape that ulcer and its blackness, and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	On the treatment of prominent teeth over the others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When the prominent teeth do not follow their natural course and are more prone to this condition, especially among women, and particularly those who are more venerable; therefore, you must consider: if a tooth is close to another tooth and cannot be removed or loosened, then extract that one; but if it is not attached to another tooth, then cut it with this instrument, which has the following form; it resembles a pig's snout and should be made of Indian iron with an extremely sharp edge.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And let your incision be such that you cut it over several days due to the hardness of the tooth, and ensure that none of the other teeth are damaged.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if a prominent tooth is excessively rough, then file it with an Indian iron file, which has the following form:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And it should all be made of Indian iron and the file used carefully; and it should be made of ground points like a file with which needles are made, with which the tooth is filed little by little over several days easily, so that no other tooth becomes damaged or decays.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And then tie that at the end, and shave that with sharp razors.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if it is a tooth of which a part is broken and it harms the tongue, then you must file that inside so that the roughness of that fragment is removed and smoothed, and fill it so that the tongue is not hurt nor the speech corrupted.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On the restoration of damaged teeth with gold or silver fillings.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When you encounter front teeth that have been displaced or loosened by impact or falling, and the patient cannot chew on what they eat, and you have treated it with styptic medicines but your treatment has not worked, then in order to prevent them from falling out, they should be secured with gold fillings and not silver ones, because silver can corrode and will fall out after a few days, whereas gold never changes.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And the filling should be of such fineness and thickness that it can enter between the teeth; and the method is to take the filling material and place twice as much between two healthy teeth, then increase it with two twists of the filling material between the damaged teeth, or if there is one or several, until the thread reaches the healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then repeat the insertion into the area where you began, and insert your hand with ease and skill so that it is not rough.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And let your grip be with which you hold the thread so that it does not slip from the roots of the teeth.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then separate the excess bile from the extremities using forceps or tongs, and add those to each area by hand, and place them between the healthy tooth and the decayed tooth, so that they do not cause injury to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then loosen that area as tightly as possible.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	If it is loosened or broken, strengthen that or those with another thread in such a manner throughout its entire length. 
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the reaction of two healthy teeth and two diseased ones, just as you see these bound together:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when it is done that one or two teeth are returned to their respective places at the gum line, and they have grown back as we have described, and that they remain in place.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And this is done only by skilled artisans and wise [individuals].
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And sometimes a piece of cow bone is adapted as a cause [likely meaning "solution" or "remedy"], and it is fashioned into the shape of a tooth, and it is placed in the location where the tooth is missing, and it is secured as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	On the condition that affects the tongue and prevents speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This condition that affects the tongue sometimes is present from birth, with which a person is born, or it is accidental and occurs due to an injury that has already healed.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation is to open the mouth of the patient, with their head positioned in your lap; then lift their tongue, and subsequently cut that nervous ligament according to the width within which the tongue is separated from its root.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	And if in that area there is any hardness or knotting, and this has been caused by the consolidation of an inflammation, then you cut and divide that area across its width between where you have already divided the ligament and dissolved the knot.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And take care that a fissure is not made in the layer of flesh and that you do not split the artery here, causing blood to flow.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And then wash the remnants of the incision with wine, or with vinegar, or with cold water; and then place a salve on it; this is a method where the patient keeps the salve under their tongue each night to prevent it from solidifying again. 
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	And if a blood flow occurs, place finely ground vitriol over the area; but if the bleeding continues, then cauterize the area with a red-hot cautery which is suitable for this purpose.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	Then treat it with other methods until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	On the extraction of a ranula from the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes, a swelling resembling a small ranula appears on the tongue, preventing it from functioning normally; and it grows inside until it fills the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the procedure is to open the mouth of the patient wide in front of the sunlight and examine the swelling.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see it is of dark or black color, hard, and the patient feels no sensation in it, then do not touch it for it is cancerous.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it has turned white, indicating moisture, then insert your finger into it and incise it with a fine spatula, cutting it completely; and if blood flows during the procedure, then place finely ground vitriol on it until the bleeding stops.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then return to your work before you have fully taken it out, before it is washed with sweet wine and salt; and treat that with another cure until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Capitol .xxxvi.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	From the extraction of abscesses from both ears and those that occur in the throat, as well as other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When they appear in the throat swollen, these are glands that are somewhat similar, which develop outward and are called the tonsils. When you treat them with what we have said in the division and it does not heal, then consider if the abscess is hard, of a dark color, with little sensation, then do not touch it with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of a red color and the root is large, then do not touch it with iron due to the flow of blood; before you let it mature inside, then either you will extract it, or it will burst on its own.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of a white color, swollen, and the root is delicate, then that one needs to be incised.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation on it is that you consider, before your operation, if the abscess has rested from cautery with complete rest or if it has decreased somewhat; then make the patient sit facing the sun, and his head should be in your hand, and open his mouth, and the servant takes hold of his tongue with an instrument of noble design, which has this form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And whether it is made of silver or iron, it should be sharp like a knife. 
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Therefore, when you press with that the tongue and the swelling is shown to you, and cut on that your garment, then take an ounce and place that in the swelling, and pull that outwards as much as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And here is the translation of the given line:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	And it is similar to forceps, but the ends of it are curved, so that the opening of each one is in line with the other, being sharp, which is made of iron and well-tempered.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	But if this instrument is not available to you, then cut it with a spatula of which this is the form: It should be sharp on one side and blunt on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And after you have incised one thigh, incise the other in the same manner of incision, and then the incision will heal the patient from cold humors.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If there is an excessive flow of blood, use water from the decoction of pomegranate peel or myrtle leaves and similar styptic causes until the bleeding is stopped, then treat it until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And at times there appear other swellings in the gums or on those two auricles, and incise those as I have said in the section about incising two tumors similarly.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I have already treated a woman with an abscess that had formed in her throat, which abscess tended to a dark color, of little sensation, and it had already closed off her throat, the woman was breathing with great difficulty, and had already been deprived of food and water, and she would have reached death if it had lasted one more day or two.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had risen so much that it broke through two paths to discharge through two channels.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Therefore, I decided to act surgically and inserted one of the instruments into one of the paths, and pulled it out, and a large portion was expelled. Then I incised the other path where I understood the abscess continued, and then I forced open the mouth, and pressed her tongue, and then I inserted the instrument into that abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	Then I removed a large part of it, and only a little blood flowed from it.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Therefore, the throat of that woman was cleared, and she immediately began to drink water, and soon after took food. Thus, I did not cease to incise that abscess multiple times for a long time, and new abscesses would form in place of those, which I continued to incise until they were fully resolved.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Therefore, I have already gathered and cauterized the wound of him, thus stopping the bleeding; then I wandered about and do not know what God did with that one near me.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Capitol .xxxvii.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	From the beginning of the swelling when it has become abscessed. 
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When they call it catarrh in the throat, and if it is swollen and elongated, then it is named perpendicular; and if it is found thick and round in a part, then it is called buba. 
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	When it is treated with what we have said in the division, and you do not find your treatment effective, and nevertheless you see that an abscess has already formed and is hardened and subtle, then you must incise around the area that has aggregated; and if it extends to a certain length, and is bloody, of dark or black color, and does not feel sensitive, then you must attempt to incise it, for in this there is fear for the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see that according to the method I have described of its whiteness and length, you should make the patient sit and press their tongue with an instrument whose shape allows for this procedure, then insert the ounce into the new area, pull it down, and incise it using one of two instruments which are used in the incision of two halves. 
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And it is necessary that you do not incise beyond what naturally fits its boundary, for if you cut further, you will harm their speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And then for the incision, use what we have recommended in the section of two halves, and take care that it heals properly.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the patient is frightened by the incision made on them, one must use ingenuity in the cauterization to address their fear, and the method of cauterization should not be harsh but rather with sharp water. Place the head of the patient on your thigh, then press their tongue with the instrument we have mentioned, and then take the water that has been specified in the chapter on cauterization, and warm it with that live heat source, and place it neither too thickly nor thinly, and use this to fill the concavity of the instrument which is shaped thus:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Let the extremity of it be concave in such a way that the medicine is placed like the concavity of a spoon, and place the instrument with the medicine on the ulcer. The patient should lie on their side so that no saliva or mucus from the mouth mixes with the intrinsic medicine, so that it does not descend by any means into the throat of the patient and cause harm to them.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	Then place your hand with the medicine and apply it to the uvula for a short period of time until you see it become darkened and soothed by the action of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take some cloth and wrap it around the end of the reed, and submerge the cloth in the medicine, and insert the reed with the cloth into a tube so that the cloth adheres to that tube, and do this as many times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the grape, and then let it dry until it falls off after three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to repeat the medicine, do so, and then for the cauterization, clean around the grape with a cloth soaked in wine, and modify what is in its circuit of the medicine, and it should be washed with cold water, and treated externally with poultices, and internally with decoctions until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this type of treatment is safer than incision and longer in duration.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Sometimes the uvula is cured with something more subtle than cauterization and incision, for it is treated by fumigation in this manner: take candles, hyssop, origanum, rue, saffron, chamomile, bryony, and similar herbs; prepare all those ingredients or some of them in a pot, and let them be submerged in sour wine, and boil; the pot should be well sealed with suitable wax, and place a tube in the middle of the pot on which is placed a concave instrument made of silver or iron.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And insert the extremity into the mouth of the patient so that the vapor reaches the uvula over the canal, so that the uvula is moved or obscured.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And then apply to those dry spotted areas, and be careful not to perform this treatment at the beginning of the occurrence of abscesses, because it would overly concentrate on the abscess, and you should not do that; instead, you should declare the treatment of the abscess with a cautery.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	And if this instrument is not available to you, then take a reed and attach an eggshell to the end of it so that the patient's mouth can be cleaned, because the eggshell prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On the extraction of thorns and other objects that adhere to the throat and other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Spotted objects adhering to the throat or fish bones or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then you must extract what is visible of those objects, on which you focus your sight, by pressing the tongue with an instrument in front of light, so that you can see clearly what is in the throat.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And what does not appear and is hidden in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because by doing so, the cause attached to the throat will be forcefully expelled through vomiting; or that the patient swallows a piece of raw radish or chicory root or a piece of dry bread; or takes a piece of dried sea sponge, and soaks it strongly with honey, and then the patient swallows that, because when it reaches the place where thorns are and is extracted, it will be forcefully expelled.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And also take an eel and wrap it in honey, and place it inside until it is softly extracted; or take a leek and soften it and then insert it gently.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	And if it is not forcefully expelled by the causes we have mentioned, then use an instrument made of lead according to this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And it should be thicker than a small tube, and at one end, it should have a curvature that allows you to insert it into the patient's throat easily.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And raise the patient's head upwards, and be careful not to touch the bones of their throat, so that you do not cause harm by pushing against the bone or spine, or have the doctor use their hand to guide it.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	And although the patient himself interferes more, by his knowledge of the site of the attached cause and pushes into it, and pulls his hand with the instrument onto it, all this according to the quantity that is prepared for him inside before being plugged up.
Capitol .xxxix.	Capitol .xxxix.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	From the extraction of the leech attached to the neck.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When leeches are treated as we have said in the section of treatment with medicines and not compresses, consider at this time the shadow of the patient under the sun, because you have examined the tongue of the patient with an instrument that we have recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore, if you use bloodletting, extract it with a small instrument or with subtle maneuvers appropriately.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible for you to extract with that, then take a concave cannula and insert that into the throat of the patient, and then place an ignited iron in the concavity of the cannula, and do this as many times (until the bloodsucker is dead and comes out of the throat) and the patient must abstain from water for the entire day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a vessel full of cold water, open the mouth of the patient in it, and wash the mouth with it; and do not remove it for any reason and let the patient gargle the water back and forth with their hand for about an hour, because the bloodsucker immediately contracts upon feeling the water.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	But if it is not cured by what we have recommended, then fumigate the patient with camphor or asafoetida using the instrument we have recommended for the fumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, as it may help. 
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And here is the translation of the provided sentence:
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not work, then you repeat the fumigation several times, and abstain the patient from drinking, eating salty and spicy foods, and do not let them drink water; thus, it is necessary that this regimen be strictly followed.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument with which bloodsucking (likely referring to bloodletting) is drawn from the throat when it is seen; and it resembles forceps in this way, except that there is some curvature to it:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
Capitol .xl.	It appears that the text provided is not a complete sentence but rather a chapter or section title. Here’s how it might be translated:
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the summary of the discourse concerning abscesses and their incision.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	These abscesses are various types, in different ways, according to their description, each one in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are diverse in their puncture and incision by two methods, of which one is according to the type of abscesses themselves; and by what we understand about the humors.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second method is according to the places where they occur in the body, for an abscess on the head is different from one on the buttocks; and an abscess in a fleshy part is different from one in a joint; and each of them has its treatment by operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And some abscesses should not be punctured until the pus is fully mature or complete.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	And other abscesses which should be treated when they are still raw and not yet fully matured, such as those near joints; for an abscess near a joint prolongs its existence until you can remove what is inside it, and this weakens or corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing contraction of the limb. Or if it is an abscess near a major limb, and if you delay piercing it until it is fully matured, it will affect the main limb; or if it is near the buttocks, pierce it before it is fully matured; but do not puncture one that is raw or incompletely digested, except for those near the buttocks, so as to prevent its pus from spreading inside the buttocks and forming a fistula, or becoming incurable at the site.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	But you must know the time for the puncturing of the abscess, and this is when it has matured.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you must know that it is matured when there is the cessation of pain and the end of fever, and also the reduction of heat and pulsation, and the sharpness at the head of the abscess, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And you must know that the puncture should be made in the lowest part of the abscess where the pus is collected and from which the pus will come out for the healing of the prominence.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And the puncture should always be made along the length of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in areas of the hands or feet, and in places of veins, tendons, nerves, arteries; and lastly, in all other places where reflection does not occur; for in those that do reflect, use the puncture according to that member. 
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	And when the abscess is in a fleshy area, it is better to delay the puncture until the digestion of the second stage is confirmed, as we have said; for if you pierce it before that, the suffering of the poor patient is prolonged and much foulness results, and the lips of it become hardened and its depth worsened.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	But some abscesses are punctured according to the breadth of the flesh or body part, due to necessity, or according to what the limb requires.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And it is necessary to administer a small puncture in small abscesses, and in large abscesses, a large puncture or multiple incisions according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And there are other abscesses in which it is necessary to hollow out the core and make an incision; when it is done thus, like cutting bread, and once it is done, it remains stable, just as you would treat those that occur in clusters of boils and buboes.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And there are those that are incised with a section having three angles; and there are others in which it is incised like the shape of a miter leaf, such as the abscesses on the ankles.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And among those in which a round section and a crescent section are administered, and similar to those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	And for that which is not as such like superficial lion's abscesses, you must puncture it with a superficial or flat incision only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the abscess is large and has already collected much pus, you should pierce it, not fearing to extract all of the poison at once; first extract part of it, then pack the abscess with a dressing the next day, then extract a larger portion, and repeat this process several times according to progression until it is completely drained.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And especially if the patient is of weak constitution, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an elderly person in decline, because the animal spirit often dissolves with the discharge of pus, and the patient may die quickly, so you must operate carefully. 
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Take great care with this chapter and then your puncture in which you pierce these abscesses; you must clean the wounds and consider if the wound of the abscess is small, or is a flat section; now administer poultices of oil or old catgut; and if the abscess is large, and the fissures of the puncture are numerous, then you must place a plug in each tract until they come together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the abscess a part of the chain is severed or you have made it concave around its circumference, then you must compress it with old catgut or a thread made of oiled cloth, just as when you draw out pus or roots, with moisture; strengthen that by the third day; and then process it and cure it with whatever ointment is necessary until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	And if during the time of your operation there is a flow of blood, then you should administer cold water and sour wine in which you soak an oiled cloth, and place that on the site of the bleeding multiple times.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	But if the bleeding continues, then you must administer treatment and cure using powders which I have recommended in various places of this our book and its sections.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	And if it is during winter time, and the location of the swelling is near sensitive nerves, then you should infuse pillows with vinegar and hot oil, and place those on the affected areas.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is summer and the areas are fleshy, then you must place poultices soaked in water and oil or wine and oil, and all this should be rubbed for up to three days as we have said, and then you must open the abscess, clean it out, and administer what is necessary for its healing until it is cured.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the treatment of abscesses universally, but according to the method of distinction, I have already spoken about each abscess individually in separate chapters.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XLII.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Of the section of abscesses which appear in the nape of the neck.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the nape of the neck, small abscesses appear, and they are similar to nodes that contain tunics which are in their formation; and their contents are particles.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And from them come pus, and those contain a moisture similar to slime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And from those contain moisture similar to powder, and they resemble stones; and from those come the stony, hard ones. 
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all surgeries and in the extraction of those where there is no fear, you should perform the extraction of those which do not cause contradiction or harm.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in cutting those is that you express those with an instrument the form of which comes close to this, which is called a lancet, within which you know it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	For if what is contained is moisture, then cut that with a longitudinal incision according to this superficial section:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And begin at the section of line B into line G. Thus, as the moisture is evacuated, you scrape that area which contains the moisture, and do not leave any cause behind, for if any cause remains, the problem returns repeatedly.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	Then submerge a piece in Egyptian poultice, if it is available, and if not, in water and salt; and fill the wound with that and leave it there for another day, for with this you corrode all that is rotten from that membrane.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	Then repeat the application of the Egyptian poultice a second and third time if needed, until you are confident that there is no rotten cause remaining from that membrane; now treat the wound with the poultice until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if the abscess contains fatty nodes, then you incise it in the following manner:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	with an incision having the shape of a cross, and extend once between the two lips of the incision and scrape it thoroughly, and apply your effort in extracting the membrane that contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	But if the arrow causes complications, then do what I tell you first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly, perform the section and cure of a calcified abscess as we have told you; sectioning a calcified abscess is easier, for it contains little blood and moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And sometimes some of these abscesses that are on the head in some people contain no moisture at all; the cause is that I once tried to incise an abscess on the head of an old woman and found the abscess as hard as a stone, rough, white, which could not be broken, and if anyone were to strike it, it would hurt them.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	However, in other accidental abscesses on the head this is not the case, such as the abscesses that occur on children's heads and around the earlobes; however, the sectioning of all these should be superficial.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And stop the puncturing of those from the lower part to relieve the flow of pus to the lower areas.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And then treat those with whatever is appropriate for that treatment. 
Capitol .xlii.	Capitol .xlii.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Of the treatment of scrophulas which occur in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Swollen glands often cause these swellings in the neck and in the armpits and in the groins; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck are often generated between them, and all of these scrofulas have their own proper layer, just as in the knots and swellings of the head, as we have described.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the types of these scrophulas are diverse, for some are stone-like, and some contain moisture, and there are malignant ones which do not obey treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, in the one that you find to be of good disposition upon touching, where the color that is evident is close to the color of the chain, and it is soft throughout, and it is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and it is not hard, you should incise it with a superficial cut from the part above down to the part below along the line of G within the line of B, and scrape it thoroughly, and extend both lips of the chain with an ounce, or with several ounces if you need them, as we have said in the swellings of the head, and extract it little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more cautious that neither the vein nor the nerves be cut.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And let the spatula not be too sharp, so that it does not hurt your hand upon incision, or disturb the patient, and cut what is not necessary to cut; for if you were to cut a vein or artery and stop your operation, then apply finely ground vitriol or other powders which stop blood flow, and constrict the wound, and leave within that which alleviates the acuteness of the inflammation and softens the wound so it begins to become pus-filled.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is congealed.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Then return to your operation until you have completed it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then use your index finger to check if there is any cause of the other small swellings, then incise those and clean them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if there is a large vein at the base of the swelling, you must not incise that swelling at its base.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Before it is necessary to heat that with strong folded cloth and to leave that inside so that it falls by itself without harm.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the wound with old cataplasm which you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then treat it thus.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you incise that scrofula completely, then you must approximate the two edges of the wound and sew them immediately so that there is no remaining excess material above.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that there is excess material due to the size of the scrofula, you must understand how to incise the root of it, draw it out, and administer suture as mentioned.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for those scrofulas that contain moisture, pierce it with a superficial puncture where you see the site of maturation, and make an incision to drain the pus at the base of the swelling, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then administer a puncture, using cautery and ointments similar to those, so that it corrodes the remaining corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And then when you see the wound already cleaned, then you treat it with an ointment of flesh-generating properties until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Capitol .xliii.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Of the section of the abscess plug that occurs in the groin.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients performed this section on the abscess plug, and no one has been seen in our land who has done this procedure.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the speech of those [individuals]. 
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	More in men who have hemorrhoids, it must be avoided to extract the stone, because by doing this no benefit is made since all the veins and the larger ones of the patient are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	And in those who have abscesses caused in the mouth or throat or both ears, when the illness is not in the bone, it is necessary to incise from the section of the epiglottis to avoid the destruction that is caused by perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, when we want to do this, we must incise the epididymis leaving three circles of the epididymis untouched, or make four small sections across its width between two such circles, ensuring that the cut is made in the body part, not in the cartilage, and this area is suitable for sectioning because it lacks flesh and the blood vessels are sparse.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is inexperienced, it is necessary to extend the ligament of the kneecap with an incision, and then cut the ligament until it reaches the canal, but avoid the blood vessels if there is any reason to do so.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	Then incise the chipla as we have recommended; it is indicated by the section of the canal through the flap, which is that part that remains after the disruption and by the separation of the voice. 
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	When the hour is dreaded in which the perforation is feared, add two loops of the chain of the wound, and thus only the cartilage is affected. 
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that promote flesh growth within so that it may heal.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Albucasis says that the essence of the sermon we have recounted is that some of those abscesses have already obstructed the windpipe of the patient, and the patient has come near to death, and their breath is cut off, and some proceed to incise the epiglottis so that the patient may breathe at the site of the wound through some respiration and be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And by this, you should leave the wound open until the malignity of the disease is consumed; and the malignity lasts for three days; and then after that, you should close the wound and treat it until it heals.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen in my practice is that a servant took a knife and inserted it into her windpipe and cut a part of the trachea with it, and I was called for her treatment, and I found the sound like the moaning of someone dying, and uncovered the wound and found blood that had seeped from the small wound.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore, it must be confessed that she had not cut any vein or artery, and the air came out of the wound, and she treated it until it healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And it does not harm the servant if there is no hoarseness in their voice, and after a few days they return to the improvement of their conditions.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that in the section of the hernia there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Capitol .xliv.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Of surgery on an abscess that occurs outside the throat area, and it is called a hernia of the throat. 
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This kind of swelling named hernia of the groin is a large swelling according to the body's color, and it occurs in women. 
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it is of two manners, for it can be either natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural case, it is not something to be cured.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental is of two manners, one of which resembles fatty nodes, and the other manner is similar to an abscess, which is caused by arterial obstruction, and in that case, there is danger.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And it is not necessary to apply pressure with iron unless it is in the case where it is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you should probe and examine it with your finger. If you find it resembles fatty nodes and is not suspended by any veins, then incise it as you would for nodes, and extract it using what contains the contents of the pouch and fluid; otherwise, thoroughly investigate its entire nature, and then treat the area with whatever is necessary for healing until it is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLV.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	On the section of types of nodes.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	About the various types of nodes, I have already described all their types in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And it is necessary that I recount thus the difference between a knot and a hernia as if there were doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	So I say that in a hernia there is heat and fever and violent pains within until the boiling of the excess is calmed; and complete putrefaction occurs at which point the fever, pain, and heat cease.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	However, in a knot, there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains a solid mass that is like a lion's paw in its own sack.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it depends on the color of the body, and its beginning is like a seed, and it grows as a vein, being larger or smaller, and they are of two types: dry or fatty and containing moisture, and the colors of the moisture are spots, as I have described in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you arrive at the treatment of a knot, you must remove it and trace it back to its origin using a tool that is called an introitus, as its form will be described in the chapter that follows this one.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And it is the method of investigating abscesses and all knots, which is that you take this tool and insert it into the most moist area that you find in the abscess, and you will stir the contents with it little by little until you know that the tool has penetrated the core.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And then adjust your hand according to the size of the abscess, and then extract the foreign matter and consider what has been left behind in its trace.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the current humidity, of whatever color it may be, is extruded, then you incise it with a superficial cut as I have said in other cases of abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no humidity left in the trace of the foreign matter, then you know that it is fatty.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And dry it with a cut in the shape of a cross as follows:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	Do as you have been taught, and suspend it by the knots, and remove the chain from all sides with ease, and cover the skin or sack over it, if possible, and extract that pus along with the knot.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to extract that pus entirely, and sometimes you must do this instead, and then you extract it in pieces to ensure nothing remains.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	For if any of it remains, whether little or much, the knot will return accordingly.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that some small part remains from it, then complete the wound with some sharp and caustic powders, strengthen the wound, place over where the abscess sits a cautery, and treat that with another form of cure until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if the knot is large, then sew the two lips of it together and treat that with something that promotes healing.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	But if the pulse is contrary or non-pulsating, then cut and fill the area with something like trissat which is vitriol, leave that in place for two or three days until the wound becomes pus-filled and the blood's boiling subsides; then return to incising what remains of the knot.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLVI.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	On the forms of instruments necessary for section and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those, the forms of the instruments are of three types, some are large, some are medium, and some are small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large instrument is as follows:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The method of midwifery is as follows:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of introducing something small is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	Here is the translation of the given line:
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of the experienced ones, and they are called albedri, and one of those is called beryd.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And so of three spices, for among them are grain, honey, and a little [of something else].
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of great experience, form of it:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of experienced midwife, in this case:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of poultice, form it as follows:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It seems like the text you provided is a mixture of languages similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Here's an attempt at translating the given sentence:
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And you make them round, thick, like large needles with which leather is sewn together, and they are made of citrus wood, or of wood or iron, or silver, and the best ones are those made of citrus wood.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And they make the practice of black plumes, which they agree that by those the fistulas in their cavity are opened where reflections occur, and are reflected with its light with those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And of three types, for some are long, and others medium, and others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and the stricture. 
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Forma del experient gran de plom:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Form of the experienced midwife with lead:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Form of the small lead instrument:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of wounds are of various types, for some are simple curves, which have only one curvature, and they are of three types: large, small, and medium.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And from these are formed hooks, and they are of three types.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of those hooks having two curves, and there are three types. 
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And they have three curves, and are of three types.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all of these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	It seems like the text is written in an old or constructed Romance language similar to medieval Latin or Old French. Here's a translation of the provided phrase:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Form of a simple emollient:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Form of an onion poultice:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Form of an instrument having two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the scalpels with which nodes and abscesses are cut and squeezed, and they come in three types, namely large, medium, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Forma de scapel gran:
Forma del scapel migier:	Forma del scapel migier:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Forma de scapel pauc:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The extremities through which a section is made are sharp, and the other extremities are not sharp, and they are not placed in such a manner, but rather to ensure that there is caution during the lancing of nodes so as to avoid injury to veins or nerves, and through this the patient may be healed and find some tranquility from the burning sensation that arises from the lancing of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of almagidas, and they are of three types: large, medium, and small, as you will see.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of the large magda:
Forma de magda migier:	Form of the medium magda:
Forma de magda pauc:	Form of the small magda:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are made from barley and resemble the form with which alcohol is made.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And in the soft extremity, it is pricked with a hidden spatula and in that area, it reaches both inside and outside parts, as you wish, just as you see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spatimis, which are hidden between the fingers causing the puncture of the abscesses and the patients do not feel them, and they exist in three species: large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of cupping with which the blood flow is cut off, and there are three types; large, medium, and small; the forms of it:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut, e sian subtils.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And it is necessary that these sizes of cupping glasses be large, medium, and small, so that with those you can quickly draw off blood when needed, and at times when first there is no medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use those for bleeding the entire body, and only use them on fleshy areas, such as in the creases of the arms and thighs, and in the creases of the breasts, belly, and knees, and similar to these in other fleshy moist creases.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And sometimes, other small instruments resembling little hooks according to this form are used; through which the blood is let when performing phlebotomy or proper incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes they are made round according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	On the treatment of men's breasts that resemble those of women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Sometimes the breasts of some men become swollen due to the excess of sleep as they start to become flaccid, and then the breasts swell and resemble those of women, becoming pendulous and full of abscesses.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And for the one who wishes to treat this condition, you must incise those areas with a lunar section according to this form, from line B inward to line G, and then extract all the thickness, and then apply a wound-healing medication to the wound, and then suture the two edges of the wound together, and care for it until it is healed.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Here is the translation of the given text line by line into English:
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the incision of what needs to be cut due to the patient's restlessness and blood flow, then you must fill the wound with a cloth soaked in corrosive ointment and leave it there until it corrodes the fat that is inflamed, and then treat it so that it may heal.
Capitol .xlviii.	It appears you've provided a section marker, "Capitul .xlviii.", which in English would be translated as "Chapter XLVIII." This likely indicates the start of Chapter Forty-Eight in a text or document. If you need further translation or have more content from this chapter that requires assistance, please provide it!
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	This phrase appears to be in an archaic form of Latin or a related medieval language. Here is the translation into English:
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These swellings that come from a kind of scrofula, which are hard and contain a sac-like membrane.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And of those that contain humidity; and those that contain humidity must be incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from the line G to the line B. And when all is evacuated which is in the abscess of the pus, then you fill it with old wool and clean the inside on the other day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And then the cut should be closed and treated with an appropriate ointment until it heals.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess is from the glands of the nodes and the scrophulas, then you should incise it in the same way as we have described in the section on scrophulas.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	And if the plague has spread to the point of putrefaction, then apply a cautery as we have previously described.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLIX.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	On the section of abscesses that occur due to arteries or veins.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an artery is ruptured, and the chain that is above it becomes solidified, then speckled abscesses may occur. The signs by which it is known that inflammation and abscess are due to an artery or a vein: for when the abscess is due to an artery, it forms a long aggregation in the area of the body; and when you press the abscess with your fingers, you feel a rustling sound within it.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is due to veins appears round on the surface of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And to incise on this swelling is an error, and especially so in those areas near the joints, and in the knees, and in the neck, and in many parts of the body; and it is large, therefore its treatment with iron should be avoided, and that which is in the extremities or head should also be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	And for that which is caused by the inflammation of the artery orifice, make a longitudinal incision along the cord; then widen the incision with forceps and approach the artery, and free it from the tunics so that it is exposed.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And then place the needle and make it penetrate to the other side, and tie the artery with double thread in two places — this method is useful for you to learn in the extraction of two arteries which are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And then separate the area between two ligaments with a spatula until all the blood that is in it has come out, and the swelling is thus dissolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then administer treatment in which pus is generated where the ligaments are inflamed; and then treat it with appropriate ointments until it is healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if the abscess is due to vein constriction, then you must hold with your hand as much of the abscess as possible with a ligature, and then insert the needle into the place where you have held with your hand; make it penetrate; and use that double thread until you pull it out from the other side, and then tie off the abscess with a strong bandage as I have said to you in the vein binding of both sides with both ends of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	And if you fear that the thread might be pulled out, then insert the thread with that needle throughout the abscess leaving the tip of the needle first, and secure the threads at four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then dry the abscess in its middle until what is inside it is removed; then you cut off the excess of the ligature, leaving what is tied.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then place over it a cushion that you have soaked in wine and oil, and then administer the treatment made with plasters and ointments until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Capitulize the abscess which you encounter due to nerve twisting.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And the incision is made in the areas of the instep or the ankle, or in any place where the joints are painful.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a severe abscess, and it resembles the color of the rest of the body, and it occurs in the major parts of the body where such conditions are disposed to occur, and when it becomes tight with vehemence, the patient appears to be in a state of stupor.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not an aggregated abscess in the groin area of the body, and therefore the chain (likely referring to lymph nodes or muscles) is left behind, and it spreads throughout without moving forward or backward.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, of those that are in the joints, it is not necessary to wrap them with iron, for fear that they will cause contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	But those that are on the head or forehead should be treated with a spatum (likely a type of medical instrument).
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	But if it is a small abscess, then take hold of it with forceps and remove it completely.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then suspend it with an incision, and drain it, and then clean the area; sew up the wound, and care for it until it heals.
Capitol .li.	Chapter II.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Of the incision of an abscess that occurs from the groin to the abdomen. 
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Here is the translation of the given text line by line into English:
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have seen one, and in its belly were two parts which resembled large fungi, and there was no difference between those white, small roots.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And already the lips of those were turned inside out and split open, and moisture was flowing from them all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore, I incised those and found one weighing eighteen ounces and the other six ounces.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation on the incision is that you consider whether the patient is moist, and if the color of the skin is white, moist, with a fine texture; then you make the incision with a broad scalpel, and have cautery irons ready in the fire, because small clots should be expelled from the cut; and if blood gushes out, cauterize it.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if the patient is pale and fearful, guard against cutting with iron; but instead take fresh lead plaster, and strengthen it with that material, in the manner we have described; and leave that for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And then adjust in the constriction of the lead thread; therefore, do not stop pulling the large lead weight until it is cut off and falls down by itself.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	And if the stone is of considerable size, then at the beginning of its removal there may be cause for fear and terror, especially in cases where it is located in the abdomen.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	But it is possible that you can remove half of it, and then cauterize the area so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	Then treat the area inside so that the wound may heal.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And be careful not to assume that you should incise a stone which is of dark color, with little sensation, and of suspicious appearance, for that one is cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And bring it to mind with the reminder of this warning.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter II.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	On the treatment of a protrusion in the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	A protrusion in the navel can be caused by various reasons; it may be due to fissures in the spine that is above the abdomen, and from there comes out tissue or intestine as happens in other ruptures; or by blood flowing from a vein or artery as was mentioned before, or by trapped wind in that area.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	And if it is due to a rupture of the spinal cord and protrusion of the membrane, then the color of the swelling resembles that of the body's skin; there is little pain, and soon it appears in various locations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then its situation differs more violently from what we have recounted. As you press that area with your hands, it becomes hidden, and then returns; and forcefully it emerges again, magnifying the movement of the entrance of the bath and violent labor.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	And if due to moisture, it is swollen and not hidden when pressed with your hand, nor is it constrained, nor hardened.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is due to blood, then with these signs, the abscess appears in declining blackness. 
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	And if it is due to soft flesh, then it is a severe abscess, large and hard, and it is implanted according to a certain quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	But if it is due to flatulence, then the touch of it is fierce (like a lion).
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation on it is that you should consider whether the prominence of the navel is due to arterial blood, or venous blood, or flatulence; therefore, you must abstain from its treatment, for there is fear and dread as I have taught in the chapter where I spoke about abscesses caused by arterial and venous blood.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine or the membrane, then you must order the patient to hold their breath and lie down extended; then feel around the entire circumference of the navel with your hand; then command them to remain lying on their back between your hands; then trace around the circumference of the navel with a spatula where you felt with your hand; then extend half of the abscess upward using a large finger; and finally, bind around the circumference with strong plaster or wax in a proper manner.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And then pierce the middle of the abscess extended over the ligament and insert your finger into that area to search for the intestine; and if you have found or grasped it through the ligament, now you pull outwards and push the intestine towards the inner parts of the abdomen.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found the membrane, then take that with your fingers; and cut away the excess parts of it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	But if it is against an artery or vein, then circle that area, and then continue with your procedure; take two needles and put strong threads through them, and insert the two needles into the circle you have made around the abscess in a crosswise manner, making sure they penetrate; then hold the abscess tightly in four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you want, remove the needles and allow the area inside to let the extended flesh putrefy and fall off by itself; or cut away that which has become thin and can be removed, and then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the protrusion of the navel is due to flesh growing in it or from moisture, then you must hollow out the abscess as we have said and drain the blood or moisture that you find within it, and then treat it with what is necessary so that the area is consolidated.
Capitol .liii.	Capitol .liii.
De curacio de cranc.	Of the treatment of hernia.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already mentioned, in the division, the types of hernia and in what manner it is treated with medicines, and what should be avoided in its treatment with iron so that it does not become ulcerated; and we have discussed a hernia generated in infants and the precautions for its treatment.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancients said that sometimes a hernia can be removed from its location, such as a hernia in the breasts or in the thigh, and similar to members allocated for extraction of the whole, especially when it starts small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it is old and large, one should not attempt to treat it, for I have not been able to heal any from this, nor have I seen another who has succeeded in doing so.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation on it is when it is to be done as we have said, which is that you precede by leaving the patient and purging them of black bile several times, and then compress it if there is a clear sign of swelling.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient with preparations in which they are placed for the operation, and then expose the area with hooks that are needed for it; and then hollow out all around with a good, well-applied ligature to extract completely so that no cause of its roots remains.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the blood flow, and do not cut that lightly, and squeeze the areas, and clean the thick blood completely with your hand or with an instrument with which it is possible for you among the instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If thick blood causes obstruction in a vein or artery, then cauterize that area until the flow of blood is stopped, and then treat it with another form of treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	It seems like you've provided a section
De curacio de ydropici.	On the treatment of dropsy.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already recounted, in the division, of the types of hydrops related to water, and the signs of each type, as well as the treatment with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured with iron is only the type of althitis alone, and it is not treated with iron in the case of the type of tympanites nor the type of hyposarcha, for that would be fatal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have already treated this type of hydrops tympanites with medicines and your treatment does not bring comfort, then consider, for if the patient has already become weak, or is suffering from another illness that is a different kind of hydrops, such as if it affects his cough or abdominal swelling and similar conditions, then beware of treating him with iron, for there is fear in doing so.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	But if you find the patient to be of abundant strength, and he suffers from no other illness except hydrops alone, and is neither a child nor an elderly person, then the method of the operation is that you lift the patient between your hands, and another minister standing near him presses his abdomen with his hand, driving the water towards the area below the navel, and then take a spiny spatula according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider if the generation of edema is from the intestines, because at this time you must with the incision move away from the navel by the length of three fingers towards the lower part, along the right side toward the pubis.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	And if the generation of dropsy is due to illness in the liver, then your incision should be on the left side of the navel by three fingers.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of it is due to the spleen, then your incision should be on the right side. 
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And it is not necessary for your incision to be on the side on which the patient wishes to lie because the superfluities do not run to that place freely.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then pierce through the entire chain with the instrument, and insert into that section, and lift your hand with the spatula between the chain and the siphon, and you will extract it; and if there is a quantity of about one fingernail or so. 
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then pierce the abdomen so that the spatula reaches the empty space, which is where the fluid is located.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then extract that and insert an instrument of which this is the form:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	and it resembles a thin silver tube; it is made of silver or iron or lion tin, at the lower end of which there is a small groove, and on the sides there are three grooves: two on one side and one on the other; and the tip of it is incised in the manner of a pen, just as you often see:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the upper end of it is a ring, for when the instrument reaches the fluid, then that ring will immediately show on the instrument, thus allowing you to evacuate a moderate amount of fluid, for if you evacuate more than what is necessary in an hour, the patient may quickly die due to the resolution of their animal spirit, or you might cause suffocation which brings death near.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	Yet evacuate that fluid according to the strength of the patient and according to what is indicated to you by the condition of the patient, the strength of their pulse, and their overall well-being.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And then remove the instrument, and catch the water which is caused by heat that is immediately retained by the chain which holds the tube that is on the head of the instrument and twisted to you so that you perforate it in that manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then repeat the procedure on another day if the patient can tolerate it, and extract a small quantity of water, and do this for several days continuously, and be careful not to make mistakes until only a little water remains.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	And if you are cautious about the patient and allow a large quantity of water to leave, then treat that with burial in hot sand, induce sweating in a bath, and wait for a long time under the sun; and treat it with drying medicines until he is healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize over the stomach, and the spleen and the liver near the extraction of the water, according to what I have recounted in what precedes.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter V. 
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	Of the treatment of children who are born with unperforated urinary openings.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Sometimes, some of the children are born from their mother's womb with their head mixture not perforated (or it is a narrow passage or not in its proper place). 
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, it is necessary to cut with a puncture as soon as it is born using a fine spatula according to this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then insert into the wound a thin lead probe and tie it there, and leave it for three days or four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when he wants to urinate, let him be unmuzzled and urinate; then return him to his previous state.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not stop the flow, it is possible that the urine passing over the area may not clear this wound.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	And for those whose channel is narrow, it should be treated with a lead dilator, as we have said, for several days until it is widened.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	But for those in whom the channel is not in its proper place, as mentioned, the cause is that from birth, the channel is deviated towards the end of the penis head, so they cannot urinate properly unless they lift the penis with their hand to direct it upwards; and this does not allow for proper generation, because the sperm cannot reach the mother correctly, which is a significant illness.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the method of the operation is that the patient should be placed face down on their back, and then extend the head of the penis with your left hand using forceful traction, and incise the tip of the penis at the site of the constriction with a sharp spatula, as if cutting through a feather's quill, or remove some part so that the middle becomes similar to the head of the penis and the channel falls into its proper place as needed.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And be careful in your operation for blood flow, when you often encounter this; and stay with him as you cut off the blood, and care for the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	The text appears to be in an old Romance language
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Here is the translation of the given line:
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Motives resembling white patches appear on this balanitis on the penis and it is an elevation of loose flesh.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And of those one is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	For the non-malignant one, you must suspend it with a fine thread and cut within so that all of it is severed; then place it in a poultice submerged in Egyptian ointment; afterwards, treat it with an ointment called diafinicon until it heals.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the swelling is malignant and of a leprous color, then you must apply a cautery near its beginning and its root.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	But if the swelling is on the foreskin of the uncircumcised penis, and one part of the swelling is inside the foreskin while the other part is outside, then you must remove the part of the swelling that is inside at its beginning until it is stable; afterwards, treat the part that is outside, because when you treat both at once with the foreskin, it is not guaranteed that it will not be torn.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And we have seen accidents in the genitals and foreskin with blackening and corruption, so you must draw out all that is already blackened and about to corrupt or already corrupted; then apply a poultice over it using honey, which is mixed with powdered pomegranate peel and crushed and sifted herbs.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And then treat that with another treatment until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	And if there is a flow of blood, then administer a lunar cautery in the following manner:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	For a beneficial cautery serves two purposes at once, that is, for a flow of blood and for a plague when it is corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the penis is corroded and completely destroyed, then you must insert a lead catheter into the foreskin so that the patient urinates through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the case of the foreskin adhering to the head of the penis (and this adherence does not occur except in those whose foreskin is tight, and circumcision is not required; and when adherence occurs due to plague or abscess), you must gently separate them using a blunt spatula until the bond is dissolved and the head of the penis is completely released.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to distinguish those precisely, then you must gently separate with a spatula some of the cause from the head of the penis and the foreskin. This is because the foreskin, when it is thin, is easily perforated slightly due to its thinness.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a thin thread, which is already moistened in cold water so that they do not stick together again.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then it should be treated with astringent wine until it is healed.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter LVII. 
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	Of the cleansing of children and the treatment for what happens to those who undergo circumcision.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution to discontinuity like other afflictions: rather, since it is of our doing and by our will, and those who undergo it are properly children, it is necessary that we assign the best procedure and the easiest method to ensure their health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books, for it was not used in their laws, and this is because we have acquired it through experience. The reason I have found most artisans and surgeons to use circumcision and cleansing with a lancet and probes; they also use poultices with honey and anointing with ointment.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have already examined all these methods and did not find a better cleansing with scissors and a poultice with honey than cleansing with an ointment, because often the foreskin comes off too much above, since the foreskin has two layers, and the inner layer remains, which then requires another anointing and is sure to cause pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And with the cleansing which is done by a syringe, and is digital, used by surgeons, the incision at the end of the male member is not safeguarded, for fear it will enter too deeply.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	And in the operation with a nail, if you forcefully use iron, you will corrupt your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the umbilical cord of the infant is short by nature, and often born in such a way that it does not require modification, and I have seen this.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	And concerning the modification that is done with scissors and ligatures with thread, the goodness, my experience shows me, is that the scissors are of proportional construction, for which reason the sharpness on top is as sharp as the sharpness on the bottom; and thus when you press your hand, it moves two sharp edges proportionally, and cuts according to a comparison in one motion; and the thread compresses the cord of the penis from all sides with a figure that prevents any error from occurring.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the method of the first operation is that you should place the child in such a way, especially if it is one of those who can be handled gently, that you only tie the thread around its penis just enough, and leave it that way until the next day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	Then make the child happy in every way that is possible to you so that it receives comfort and understanding.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	Then make the child stay between your hands, prepared and not showing any sign of fear; and hide the scissors in your hand or behind your back so that the child does not see them or any other of the instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then insert your hand into the penis and blow into the urethra, and pull it in so that the head of the penis is seated, and then clean that which has been added to it from filth.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then apply the marked area with double-folded thread, and then place another smaller second ligature below it, and then take a pointed object and press firmly on the ligature site with good pressure, and incise between the two ligatures.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then lift the urethra slightly and extract the head of the penis; and let the blood flow little by little, for it is better; and apply powder over it, and on top of the powder place a cloth in which egg white cooked with rose oil has been spread; and leave that there until the next day; and treat it with treatment until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The form of the scissors for modification is as follows:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	Let one end of the scissors be uncut and the other end be cutting, so that the key's prong is not exposed, and let the length of the two sharp ends be equal to the length of two equally sized handles.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	But the error in purification is that you completely or partially avoid the intrinsic chain, which you should incise.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, it is necessary that you stretch the skin of the affected area with your fingernail before the inflammation occurs at the site and that you incise it according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then extract that with a hook and incise that.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	And if three days have passed and the swelling remains under the foreskin due to an abscess, then you should wait until the abscess matures, and then easily drain it, and incise it as you deem appropriate.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And be careful of the head of the penis, for it should not be affected by that.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And thus treat it with that which consolidates the wound, using the powders we have recommended in the section on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is incised too deeply on the chain (likely referring to a surgical incision), and you extend to the parts above, this should not harm the patient.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And instead, treat it with what we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter LVIII.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction made by stones or frozen blood, or pus or flesh growths, and similar to those we have mentioned regarding the methods of treatment in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved and there is retention due to a stone that is already in the neck of the bladder, then the patient must be bent over their knees.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And then position the patient's feet on their back and stretch out their belly from the part above their back, and have the patient hold their own neck as much as possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Therefore, when the neck of the bladder is forced to expel the stone towards the back parts, urine is released.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it is not dissolved by what we have said and the cause vehemently affects the patient, then you must administer extraction from him with an instrument that is called a syringe, of which this is the form: It should be made of silver and its tube should be thin like a bird's quill with a fineness equal to a palm and a half in length, at whose end there should be a fine tube.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the method of urination extraction is as follows: take a folded cloth and tie one end to wool or cotton with a good knot; insert the ends of the cloth into the part of the syringe, and cut with scissors any excess of the wool if necessary, but insert it forcefully into the tube. Then draw the syringe with force and use egg white.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And place the patient on the sheet, and wash the bladder and penis with moist oils, olive oil, and water.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then insert the syringe easily until it reaches the tip of the penis; and then bend the penis upwards at the part of the glans; and then push the syringe into that area; and then continue pushing it until it reaches the bladder, and the patient will feel that it has reached the desired location. However, this is not always done in this order, but rather follows the path which may be curved.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then stretch the bile with the wool little by little, for the urine soaks the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Then extract that and use the urine for treatment, and use a catheter; do not stop doing this and use a catheter until the bladder is emptied and the patient finds relief.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter .59. 
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Of the quality of catheterization of the bladder with clamped instruments and similar tools which are appropriate for this.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When you encounter ulceration or abscess in the bladder, or congealed blood within it, or if pus is constrained there, and you wish to distill waters and medicines into it, then an instrument called clamped-drill should be used, and this is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	And here is the translation of the given line:
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that place three incisions are made: two from one side, thus as you cut. 
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the beginning is the concave space, in which that which is expelled resides, and it increases according to how much fills it, so that when any cause pulls from the humidities within, it is drawn out, and when it is expelled, along with that it is pulled out, and when it is expelled long, similar to how cleavers are used with naphtha in naval battles.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, if you want to remove moisture from the bladder, insert the end of a tube into the moisture, and with that draw out what is pushed up to the upper parts, for the moisture is drawn into the cavity of the tube.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	Then insert the end of the tube into the urethra as we have recommended in the circumcision; and then push the moisture with what you use to push, for that moisture reaches the bladder immediately, and the patient feels it.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The form of the catheter that is subtle with which the bladder is catheterized is as follows:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it should be made of silver or lead, with the tip resembling a small feather, and leave a small channel inside.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	Then take the bladder of an animal, and place in it the moisture you want to introduce into the bladder, and then tie it tightly with a double thread between two points, and warm that moisture over fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	Then insert the end of the catheter into the urethra.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then press your hand on the bladder with moisture applied firmly so that the patient feels that the moisture has already reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	And if the bladder is not present, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle from it; pierce that entirely around its roundness; then insert strong pitch into those holes so that it is thoroughly mixed; then attach the circle as you would apply a poultice, placing it on the area where you want to apply moisture, ointments, and water.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then you attach it to the instrument and use it in the same way as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter 60.
De extraccio de peyra.	On the extraction of stones.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already discussed in the division the types of stones and their treatment with medicines, and the difference between stones formed in the kidneys and those formed in the bladder, and the signs of each.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have mentioned the stone in which one operates with the hand, and cut. 
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that which is embedded in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And I am narrating this with clear exposition and abbreviation.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore, it is said that stones generated in the bladder mainly affect children; and among the signs of this condition is that the urine excreted from the bladder resembles water in its fineness, and appears sandy; and the patient rubs his penis, often feels pain, and then urination occurs; and with this, you will notice the discharge of small particles of these.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And circumcision is the treatment for children of that age who have reached fourteen years; and it is a difficult treatment for older individuals.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	However, in younger individuals, it may be treated this way because they are among those who can recover more easily.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And for the one in whom the stone is larger, the treatment is more difficult; and if it is small, it is the opposite of that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, when we come to the treatment of this condition, we begin by cleansing the patient with catheters that extract all the pus which is in their intestines; for this pus often prevents the discovery of the stone during the examination.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then the patient is lifted by their feet and shaken vigorously in order that the stone may descend into the neck of the bladder, or jump from place to place several times.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then make that incision between your hands, prepared, and the patient's hands should be placed on their sides, so that the entire bladder is made to incline towards the lower parts.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then remove it entirely from the outside.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Therefore, if you feel the stone in the space, then you should immediately operate with incision on it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you cannot remove it entirely with your touch, then you must anoint your left index finger with oil, if the patient is a child, or your middle finger if they are a mature adult, and insert that into their anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And remove the stone that is inside while your finger is still there.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And gradually turn it inward to the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And then press on that area with your finger, and expel it from the inner parts towards the site of the incision.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand; and command another minister to extend the testicles upwards with his right hand, and with his other hand hold the cord that is below the testicles, at the site where the incision is made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then insert a probe of the following form:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And then divide that which is between the anus and the testicles, not in the middle, but closer to the left thigh; and let the incision be made on that stone with your finger in the anus, and make a transverse incision so that the outer part of the cut is wide and the inner part narrow according to how much the stone protrudes as possible, and no more, because you will feel with your finger in the anus when the stone has been sufficiently cut out and expelled.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that some stones have angles and edges, which makes their expulsion difficult because of this.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And from that, it is like a grain in appearance, and it is round, and it is made from the light secretion.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Therefore, if it is in the place where veins and arteries are located, apply [the treatment] to the裂纹。(注意：原文中的"donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marg
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not simply a matter of applying an ointment, then you must press on that area, or stretch over it appropriately with the end being like a file used to smooth stone, and do not slip off; or insert into it a delicate instrument with a curved tip.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	But if you cannot act on that area, then slightly enlarge the wound, and if you see a flow of blood, cut into it strongly with powdered vitriol.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if there is more than one stone, then at the beginning you should press your hand to the mouth of the bladder, and then incise it; and then slightly push on it. And similarly do this if they are more than two fragments.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the stone is very large, then it is unwise to incise it with a large cut, for you cause one of two things to happen to the patient: either they die or they develop continuous urinary dripping, because the area does not fully heal.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	More importantly, administer the expulsion of what has been dislodged inside, or use forceps to remove whatever is embedded in the fracture in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Therefore, once you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with pieces of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen it thus.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place over that cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in oil mixed with warm water, so that the swelling may be softened.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And then lay the patient on their side, and do not untie the bandage within the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when you have untied it, wash the area with warm water and oil, and then treat it with a fine plaster and a healing ointment until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	But if in the wound you encounter a swelling that is hot and corrosive, and of such appearance as if the blood were frozen in the bladder, thereby obstructing urination (and this is known by the discharge of blood with urine), then insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will cause corruption and putrefaction of the bladder.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then wash the wound with sweet wine, water, and salt, and apply everything appropriate for its treatment until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And throughout the entire period of treatment, you must keep both thighs open and apply the medicines that are placed over the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and is in the flesh of the penis, and it is embedded in there, and urination is obstructed, then treat that with what I recommend before resorting to surgery, because many are accused of performing unnecessary surgeries for this condition; and now I have explained this, which is that you take an iron awl, of which this is the form:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	From the given text pattern and the mixture of languages similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, I'll attempt a translation for the provided line:
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And then take honey, and anoint with it the penis after removing the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then insert the instrument into the penis, piercing easily until the piercer reaches the stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And rotate the piercer with your hand around that stone little by little, and you will penetrate through until the other side opens; for the urine will then be released.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then press your hand on the part where the stone is broken outside of the penis, for it is constricted there, and it is cleansed with urine, and the patient is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	But if this treatment is not suitable for you due to some reason that prevents you from doing it, then anoint honey below the stone and more honey above the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then make an incision over the stone on that penis between two bindings.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then extract it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then loosen the bandage and modify the clotted blood that has formed in the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to keep the bandage of the stone beneath the skin, except to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other bandage above it for that reason; because when the bandage is loosened near the protrusion of the stone, the ligament returns to its place and closes the wound.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for this reason, when you loosen the bandage above, it is necessary that you lift the ligament to the parts above, or that you return and complete your action in such a way that it closes the wound as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter LXI.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the extraction of stones from women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Stones in women are rarely formed.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	But if a stone does occur in any of them, then the cure for it is difficult and is prohibited by many methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One reason is that the woman's body is often delicate.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that you do not find a woman who is so knowledgeable as to confess herself to the doctor when she is chaste, or if she is one of the women having husbands.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is that you will not find many women well versed in this art, especially in performing the operation by hand.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the site of the incision on the stone in women is far from the location of the stone, so you need a more extensive incision, and in this case there is fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	And if necessity compels you to do this, then you must take a female doctor who is well knowledgeable, though she is rarely found.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	But if you are deprived of that, then seek someone who is quite skilled and subtle, or present a knowledgeable woman experienced in the affairs of women, or a woman who has some knowledge of this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Therefore, have that person present, and command them to do everything you instruct, starting with the examination of the stone; this is done to check if the woman is a virgin, then they must insert their finger into her anus and feel the stone. 
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Therefore, when you find it, grasp it with your finger, and then command him to step on it.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	But if she is not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the patient's vagina and search for the stone, while placing her left hand on the bladder, and compress it with good pressure.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Therefore, when you find it, you must gradually pull it from the opening of the bladder towards the area below with the strength within your means until you reach the root of the thigh.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	Then step on that area, positioned in the middle of the vagina towards the root of the thigh from whichever side is stopped, and push the stone into that area, ensuring that your finger does not slip off the stone while grasping it.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the incision should be small at the beginning; then insert the instrument into that incision, and if you feel the stone, adjust the incision according to the amount you know will allow the stone to be expelled from there.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And know that stone species are diverse: for of those one is small and large, sharp and rough, long and round, and having edges.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore you know which spices are for it by what you mean regarding what you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you see blood flow, apply powdered vitriol to the area and leave it there for an hour until the bleeding stops, then continue with your procedure once the stone is expelled.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And have prepared with you the instruments which are used in the extraction of stones in men, so that you may be assisted by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you see a flow of blood and know that the bleeding is from an artery that has been cut, then apply powder to the area and press it with cushions and tight binding, and do not repeat this; leave the stone and do not extract it, for the patient may die otherwise.
E aprop cura la plagua.	Then treat the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	When the sharpness of the blood has subsided after some days and the area has dried, then you return to your operation before the stone is completely expelled. 
Capitol lxii.	Capitol lxii.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Of section on hernia occurs. 
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And sometimes it is in the proper membrane that nature prepares for the part of the egg, between which is cooked and already another egg; and it is the chain of the genetic material between the white part of the egg we have mentioned, and this is nothing but yolk.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which affects the genitalia, for that is where this material accumulates, and sometimes it occurs due to percussion made upon the genitalia.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this humidity has various colors, for the color of it is declining to yellow or bloody, or red, or black feculent, or white watery, and that is what exists.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which it is known where this water accumulation is as follows: for if it is in the white thigh which we have mentioned, then the swelling is round declining a bit longitudinally like an egg shape, and the generative organ appears, because the moisture contains that from all sides.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the humidity is in the proper fascia, then the abscess is round with parts of an egg, and for this reason, it is thought to be another egg.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the ligament of the groin and the white rump, then apply a poultice to it. 
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And when you want to know the color of the fluid, then you express the color of the fluid in the abscess using a probe whose shape is mentioned beforehand; and according to what is seen on the tip of the probe, judge what is inside.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	And when we come to the treatment with iron, then it is necessary to command the patient to be in a bathtub if that is possible for you, and immerse their body completely.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	Then place the patient on their back on some kind of support slightly raised, and put soft cloths underneath them.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	Then sit on the left side of the patient, and command the assistant to stand on their right side, who should extend their hand from one of the two sides to the groin area and to the part below the navel.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	Then take a broad spatula and split the groin area in the middle along its length, near the penis.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And make the incision evenly and at a consistent distance from the line where you should cut the skin of the groin, until you reach the white membrane inside.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And bleed that area, observe carefully, and be cautious so that you do not penetrate too deeply; and your incision with which you make the bleeding should be suspended with the most subtle and precise scraping according to the extent possible for you.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then pierce the bladder full of water with a wide puncture, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate the two lips of the incision with hooks, and stretch the bladder upwards; do not touch the tube containing the genital organs, and cut the bladder in whatever manner is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And cut it entirely or in pieces, especially the thin part of it, because if you do not examine the incision carefully, there is no guarantee that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if you process the tube from outside its sheath during your operation, then after you have completed the incision of the bladder, return it inside, and then suture the two lips of the sheath of the genital organs together, and then treat it as you would other wounds until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the tube corrupted by another disease, then you must tie off the vessels that are near the suspensory ligaments, and remove the tube, and then treat it as we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	And if the water is divided into two parts similarly, then you know that there are two hernias; therefore, incise that part in the same way as you did in the other one; and if it appears to you that it is an operation, then do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then you clean the blood, and interweave in the incisions wool soaked in oil or oiled wool; and place on top other wool that you have soaked in wine and oil, and spread that over both groins and the navel area; and place above folded cloths and pillows, and bind those above with a bandage which is according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And then two cloths are taken and filled with padded wool according to this shape; and the ends with which pressure is applied using cloth or wet wool are made, and they are attached with a structure in the waistband of the pants, and one end should go from the back between the two, and the second at the crotch area, and two ends on both thighs underneath and two ends over both knees, and all the structure should be adjusted in the waistband of the pants.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with a cautery instead of a section with iron; and you should take a subtle knife-shaped cautery and incise the chain of the groins with it, and ignite it as we have recommended between the white rind containing the water being exposed, and then you take a cautery according to this form:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	And it is similar to the Greek letter. 
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then pierce with that instrument, and heat it so that all the moisture is expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then extend the instrument with hooks, and extract with hooks, and cauterize with a subtly heated cautery; and incise as much as you can until you remove it all; and be careful of the area so that the fire does not touch it.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is safer and causes less bleeding, and is better than an operation with incision.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if during the operation or during the cauterization, or in case of bleeding, any complication arises that hinders you, then you must treat whatever complication arises for you with the appropriate treatment as is mentioned.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the patient is weak and does not expect to endure a second operation due to its severity, then administer perforation as I recommend here; this is when you are certain, based on what we have said about the signs, that the hernia is acute.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then you must have the patient sit on some raised chair, then pierce the abscess in its lowest part with a blunt spatula, and maintain the piercing according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And let the area be wide open so that all the water can flow out entirely.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Then place your hand over the area and press it, and leave it, so that the remaining water can flow out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Then treat it until the plague is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if there is an obstruction to the discharge of water at that time, you should pierce it: this is done only when the white panicle in the orifice of the wound causes an obstacle and prevents the discharge of water. At this point, you must introduce a probe or instrument into the wound with which the water from dropsy can be extracted, the form of which has been previously described; or apply a small device to the compression of the wound.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And know that the water returns and increases again after about six months or around that time; and when it increases, then pierce it in the same manner, so that the patient may thus spend their days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter LXIII.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	On the incision of a fleshy hernia and its treatment.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in the section regarding this hernia, there is fear of causing fatal harm during major operations; therefore, it is seen by me as better to dismiss the operation and be saved by that choice.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I am recalling the operation in that case and the specifics of the abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, I say that abscesses arise in bodies where the veins are congested, and this happens for various reasons: either due to an excess of sharp bitterness that is poured into the veins, or by percussion.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and it is not accompanied by pain, and it is a severe abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And often the abscess is hardened, of which the color is dark, and there is no sensation in it.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes it is caused by the narrowing of the arteries, and by the inflammation of those, just as the memory of it is already perceived, or by the inflammation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	But that which is caused by the inflammation of arteries is known by the dispersion of the abscess when you press it with your fingers; and it should not be touched.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	But that which is caused by the inflammation of veins does not disperse at all when pressed with the fingers.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that on this kind of condition a section may be made and on other flesh as well; and you should incise the cord of the testicles, then stretch the scrotum upwards to the parts above, extract the white mass from there, release the suspensory ligament of the vessels, tie them off, and incise the suspensory ligament after you have released it entirely from all the parts of the scrotum.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	And if the scrotum is already hardened with those inflamed tissues, then you must extract the scrotum and incise it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adhesion due to some cause within the white mass, or between the vessels, then you must release all of that adhesion and incise it with a circular incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	But if there is a growth of flesh in the area of the adhesion that is behind, then you must incise all of that growth and extract the scrotum as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And when your operation is completed, then fill the wound with wool infused in oiled wine; and subsequently treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	Capitol .lxiv.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	For the translation of the given sentence:
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	Vit is an abscess enclosed by some kind of membrane resembling a boil with the softening of the testicles, and it makes difficult any physical exercise or walking for the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this disease, there is fear due to the memory of what preceded it.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, one must mention the operation in that second when performing the first steps. 
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And it says that you must place the patient on an elevated chair; then pull up the suspensorium of the testicles to their proper places; and then tie the cord of the genitalia with your own hands using the tested vessels that are approved for the purpose; and another assistant should hold those [genitals] with a strong extension.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then cut with a sharp spatula through a transverse section in the area where the vessels are exposed.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then compress from all sides as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are on the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then insert an needle with double-thread into those places, and tie it at the first of the areas where you cut, and tie it again at the end of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then cut those in the middle according to a straight incision along the length of the body, and extract what has accumulated from the foul and corrupted humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then treat the wound with a method used for other wounds where you want pus to be generated so that veins can be opened from which you will bleed one of two ounces, for it is not harmful by doing so.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	But if you accidentally affect all the vessels, then it is necessary that the testicles be removed or that the testicles are cut off along with the vessels, so that they are deprived of all nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and that they are destroyed, or that they are sealed off so that they do not remain connected to those.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter 65.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	On the treatment of intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is due to a tear that extends from the spine over the abdomen towards the inguinal region of the belly, so that the intestines protrude through that rupture into one of the inguinal canals.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the abdomen or due to exertion by the patient, and these two types occur for various reasons: through impact, jumping, crying, lifting something heavy, or similar causes.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of this condition, when it is due to a hernia spreading out, is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time and does not happen suddenly; it is an abscess that forms within where the prehn (a type of swelling) occurs because the hernia compresses the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of it is when it is due to a section of the spleen, for at the beginning it causes sudden severe pain; and there appears a swelling different from the usual appearance of the region nearby, and this is because of the protrusion of the intestine, and the body part outside the spleen swells.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And sometimes the intestine bursts through the tissue, and this type of intestinal hernia is called zirbal.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And sometimes it is caused by gas, and sometimes the intestine splits open, and here it is retained, causing great suffering to the patient, and sometimes it leads to a severe and significantly worse pain when pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of this kind of disease with iron, there is fear, for which reason the application of heat must be avoided in such cases.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the method of operating on this is to command the patient to push the intestine back into its cavity with their hand if it obeys the return, and then have them lie on their back between your hands, and lift their chest.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then place the chain which is the spermatic cord above, and cut the spermatic cord entirely along its length; then insert forceps into the two lips of the incision according to what is needed to open the incision with those.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the section is according to the quantity that you are able to remove the blood from it.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then separate that sac which holds the cord of the testicles, until the white hard capsule of each part is revealed.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then you insert your finger into the area where the testicle is located, between the white capsule which is beneath the spermatic cord and the second capsule, and separate from that adhesion which is in the part behind the scrotum.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then grasp the spermatic cord with your hand towards the outer parts, and by doing so, stretch the white capsule upwards with your left hand, and lift the scrotum with the capsule to the section area; and command the assistant to stretch the scrotum upwards while you dissolve the adhesion behind it completely.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And examine with your fingers to ensure there is no cause for the intestine being wrapped in the hard white capsule.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	But if you find any cause for it, then you push that part into the abdomen below.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then you take a needle on which is attached a thick thread made of seven threads, and insert it through the back of the capsule, which is below the spermatic cord, where the section lies; and then cut the ends that protrude from the thread until they are four threads, and then arrange some of them in a figure resembling a cross; and tie with that the capsule we have mentioned which is beneath the spermatic cord using strong binding on both sides.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then wrap the extremities of the veins and bind them tightly to ensure that none of the vessels which nourish those areas can transmit any harmful substance, so that an abscess does not form as a result.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And again apply a second bandage according to the first bandage, leaving more than three fingers away; then between these two bandages, leave from the scrotum where the testicles hang a length equal to that of a finger, and cut off everything else following the round shape, and remove the skin.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then make an incision at the part below the scrotum where blood and pus will flow, just as we have described in what we have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then apply wool soaked in oil and place it on the wound; and apply the bandage as we have described (and sometimes the scrotum is cauterized, which we mentioned near the beginning regarding the fear of blood flow, because this often happens) and leave the bandage until it falls off by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	But if the treatment is delayed, then warm water should be poured over it, and place that on it until it falls off as we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the wound with another treatment for wounds until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter LXVI.
De hernia ventosa.	From the text provided, it appears that this medieval medical treat
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this type of hernia, no one has dared to attempt its cure with iron (surgery).
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first method says that it is done as we have recounted in the hernia treated with wine; which is to tie the vessels near the section where it can be done easily; and then dry in the middle area around the abscess with something that opens it, so that the vessels fall inside.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And treat the plague as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter LXVII.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	On the dislocation that occurs in the ankles.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Sometimes a rupture occurs in the ankles as we have said, and you should examine the area.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And do not attribute any cause of the hernias to the groin; and if you do attribute a cause, it is minimal; and it returns at all times.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	And if this condition persists for a long time, a precise incision is made in the abdomen where the intestine descends into it; and this happens due to the stretching of the abdomen which occurs at the bending points as we have said, which causes the abdomen to stretch, and then soften, and the area becomes inflamed and protrudes.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the treatment of it is with cautery, as was mentioned earlier in the description of it.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And sometimes it is treated with iron in the following manner: the patient lies on their back between the healer's hands, and then the area of the rupture that has become inflamed and protrudes is dried by cutting across its width according to the quantity of three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then strengthen the white membrane that is below the cord so that it is exposed.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the probe and place it over the protruding area of the abdomen, and press it against the front of the belly.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then sew the two protruding areas at the end of the probe together using a suture to join one to the other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then extract the end of the intestine, and do not cut into the bone entirely, nor extend the wound, nor cause any other harm as I will teach you in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then treat that with the treatment of wounds, and when you cut into the abscesses, cleanse that area and restore the wound before it becomes consolidated; for the bone contracts and the prominence of the rupture does not adjust properly.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cautery is better in this area, for it is closer to healing.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter LXVIII.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On the softening of the spermatic cord.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Often, the spermatic cord is softened in some men because the flesh between them is softened, and it is believed that this affects its function.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore, it is necessary for one who is skilled in its treatment to have the patient lie on their back, and to cut along the entire softened cord over the natural cord; then to suture the two edges together.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you want, at the beginning soften the excess of the loosened chain with three roastings or four and with a firm suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then cut between the sutures; and then treat for the healing of other wounds until it is healed and the pus has drained.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter LXIX.
De castracio.	From the context provided by the previous lines and considering
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that castration is excommunicated in our law, but for certain reasons it is legitimate for me to remember it in this book; and there is no need to recall it except in two ways. The first way is so that the doctor's knowledge includes understanding its treatment when asked about it, knowing how to cure what happens due to it. The second way is that we often have a need to castrate other animals for our benefits by them, such as horses, bulls, and pigs, and similar animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And thus I say that castration is performed in two ways: either by traction or by incision with a cut.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	But in the one that is performed by traction, the method of the operation is to have the animal stand in hot water until its testicles are softened and relaxed and hang down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	Then take them with your hand while they are still relaxed and do not let them appear or come into contact with anything.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	And in a castration performed by cutting and severing, you must hold the animal and press the cord of the testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And then apply the suspensory, and make an incision over each bone with a section between two bones processed.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then incise that pus which you have squeezed out.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not leave any cause on those with gout except the subtle gout which is on the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of castration is better, which is done by atrophy, because atrophy leaves no cause from the testicles for the animal to desire copulation.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And then treat the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter LXX.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in men occurs in two ways: one is when it appears in the space along the scrotum, between the two testicles, where a female genitalia-like figure appears, complete with hair.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And sometimes urine flows from that area in the scrotum where the testicles are.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In women, it is a different case: the female genitalia above the vagina appears as two male testicles slightly to the right, and there is something like the foreskin of a man and two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the cure is of three types: two for men and one type for women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is necessary that you incise those tight muscles so that the swelling of that area is released, and then treat them with the cure for other plagues.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second type for men, where you have urine that is in the region of the testicles, there is neither cure nor operation for it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	On swelling and protruding flesh due to causes in women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Swelling suddenly appears tightly due to natural causes, during which it is pressed and a mark is observed; and sometimes it is enlarged in some women to such an extent that it spreads similarly as in men and even extends to intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Then it is necessary that you hold the excess swelling with your hand or with a tool and incise it.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not be excessive in the incision, especially near the area of the genitalia, so that it does not cause a flow of blood.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And then treat that with the treatment of wounds until it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	New-born flesh is flesh that grows in the wounds of the mother until it fills them, and it protrudes from the external parts resembling a tail (and for this reason some early doctors called it “tailed disease”); therefore, we must incise it as we would when treating slowly, and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter LXXII.
De curacio de alratica.	Of the treatment for gout.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Alratica is when the neck of the womb is not perforated, or the passage is narrow. 
E es o natural o accidental.	And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	And accidental is due to illness that has preceded it, and that which is caused either by improperly adjusted flesh or by a subtle or thick humor.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it is made either in the anterior part of the thigh, or on its sides, or on its upper part, or on its lower part, and you prohibit bathing, pregnancy, and childbirth, and strictly forbid menstruation. 
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the recognition of that is done by observing the midwife, if the obstruction is apparent, it is declared; but if it is not apparent, then you seek that with your fingers or with a probe.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	And if the obstruction is due to subtle matter under the foreskin and it extends to both lips, then you cut and disrupt that area.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And you should place cushions on both labia, and then place your index fingers of both hands inside.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman should be on her back, her thighs spread apart, and then stretch the two lips forcefully so that that subtle barrier is broken and the obstruction is opened.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take wool and soak it in oil and place that on the area, and guard the day with a man so that the incised area is not disturbed.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	And if the abscess is large and thick, then you must incise it with a broad scalpel or with a myrtle leaf.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	And if the obstruction is due to a growth of flesh, then suspend it with a hook, and cut that out.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And use the medicines that stop blood flow from bites, such as hellebore, dragon's blood, and eggs, mixed with egg white.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	Then administer a wide lead cannula so that the inflammation is not compressed lightly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And keep that for several days and administer an infusion of ash.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	Then it should be treated with another consolidation treatment until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes it happens that new growths of flesh occur, and then you must cut according to this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	But if this is due to a chronic abscess, in the case of a chronic abscess in the main area, do not use iron in any way.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter LXXIII.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	For the given sentence:
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	When hemorrhoids are considered the swelling of small veins where blood continuously flows; and when old hemorrhoids occur, they are formed thus.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already said in the division the types of those and the signs of those, and to say thus those that receive cure and those that do not receive cure.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore, I say that when hemorrhoids and tumors are in the region of the large intestine and do not appear to the senses, surgery should not be performed on those areas.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	And those that are in the opening of the large intestine and can be felt, are the ones that can be treated.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And you must place the woman in cold water, then extend the tumor with forceps or with a rough cloth, and incise them with scissors.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	Then sprinkle on them to stop the flow of blood one of the powders from astringent substances such as myrtle and similar ones.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	Then bathe the patient's feet for an hour, and then place them in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the flow of blood persists, then have the patient sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate rinds and walnuts and similar items.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	Then take flour of oats, mix it with honey and sweet wine, and make a plaster with this mixture to apply on the patient's back.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the blood is separated, that's good; and if not, cause adhesion with two cupping glasses, and perform scarification on the mamillae.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take wool and submerge it in the juice of coriander or in the juice of angelica or in the juice of wormwood mixed with wine, and apply it to the area; then treat the area with ointments until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	May the reader who has a sharp observation take note of what appears to you from that according to what I have said equally. 
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And cure that which is inside so that it may be healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	It seems like you've provided a section marker or chapter heading
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	On the piercing of an abscess that has occurred in the mother (likely referring to the uterus or a related area).
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already mentioned these diseases and the types of them and the signs of them, and the treatments for them in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And I must speak in this treatise about an abscess that occurs in the breast when it is one of those abscesses that collect pus, and if you want to know in what manner the operation on it with iron is performed.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Then you must consider whether the pain of the abscess at its beginning is sharp with percussion and phlegm and fever, and sometimes it reddens, and if you press on it, then do not treat it with puncture, and cure it with what aids maturation until the acuteness of the symptoms subsides.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And now you must have the woman sit on a bench that has two supports; and she should recline on her back and adjust her feet to the part below the abdomen, and her thighs should be spread apart, and place her arms below her knees, and tie them down with bindings as appropriate.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	Then the midwife should follow with the proper technique and administer the instrument used to open the orifice of the mother, the form of which will be detailed in the following sections.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And when you want to administer this instrument, you must place it gently at the entrance of the mother's womb, and the part of the instrument that enters the womb should not be larger than the entrance of the womb and should lead the patient carefully. 
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	And if the instrument is larger than the opening of the mother (uterus), then you must place pillows on the texture of the uterus's opening so that it prevents any instrument from entering the opening of the uterus.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And it is necessary that you pause the flow that runs through the instrument above and that the assistant holds the instrument and rotates the flow while the opening of the main area is being opened.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when pus appears, and it is touched with the hand and found to be hot and moist, then you must dry that area by applying a spatula or scraper to the head of the affected region.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the pus is evacuated, then you must place on the wound a cloth soaked in oiled rue or anointed oil which has some astringency; and apply the bandage to the incision at the site of the main wound.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And place externally over the womb and on the perineum clean wool soaked in water in which mallows have been boiled.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then it should be treated for about two days with an ointment that you must apply until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And sometimes the wound and the affected area are washed with water and honey, then with water in which root bark of lily or longwort has been boiled, and then return to the ointment.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is inside a swollen area, then you must abstain from treating it with iron, instead cure it using what we have said in the section.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter LXXV.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach the midwives how to treat malformed fetuses when they appear in an unnatural form.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	It is necessary that the midwife recognize the natural form of childbirth by its signs. When you see a woman expressing discomfort during labor and desiring to smell the air, and she becomes restless due to what is happening in her body, and hastens the expulsion of the fetus, then you know that this birth is in a natural form, with the expulsion of the head first, followed by the rest hanging or suspended from the navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore, when you see those signs, it is necessary to compress the patient's belly so that the embryo descends easily because when they descend with their head first, tell them the second stage has begun, and cleanse them of those excesses with a good cleansing.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	However, what is different in this part is not natural and not praiseworthy, because when the embryo sits on its feet and its body is positioned in front of its head and its feet, or one hand or foot is extended out, or its head and a hand are positioned, or towards its belly, and it quickly turns around its neck, resembling unpraiseworthy figures. 
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	When there is a necessary cause, it is required that the midwife be wise and subtle in all those matters, and that she guards against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And I am showing all the figures of those [conditions], and what mechanism is in them by which it is signified by that and stands upon that.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the flow is situated on her head by natural movement, and it is strong over the woman and occurs in a difficult part, and sometimes its strength is already weakened, then apply that treatment, or let women use it, and evaporate its seed with fenugreek juice and humid oils.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then insert the midwife between the ribs of the small spine and split with that the second part, or cut that with her nail until you remove what is inside it of moisture.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the woman's abdomen until the fetus descends.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	And if it does not descend, then the woman should be treated with a decoction of flaxseed and a decoction of fenugreek with an ointment.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	Then command the patient to be compressed and make them sneeze with condiments; place your mouth on their nose and mouth for about an hour, as the fetus will come out soon. 
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if both sides of the fracture are displaced at the beginning, then you must reduce them with ease little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	And if the instrument does not work, then place the woman on a chair and lift her feet up, and then lower the chair to the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall from the jolt.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the bones have not been returned inside and the fracture has worsened, then incise those areas and extract the broken piece of the bone or tie the body part to his hand with a cloth and extract it carefully, because that part will be displaced.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	Regarding the expulsion of the embryo from the mother's body.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the fracture is on the mother's feet, then you must push those bones upwards, and then bend the fracture slightly, and then align it, and then take one of the feet and stretch them little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	But when it is expelled between the thighs, then you command them to strain, and cause that to turn out carefully, because it will be displaced if God wills it. 
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not removed by what we have recommended, then you gradually return the small part while placing that second natural figure back in place, because that will now be easily expelled with light pressure.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is prohibited by all that we have recommended, then take some alum and dissolved gum, and pound everything together in the mortar with thorough pounding, and then apply this mixture to the woman's womb, at the lowest part of her abdomen.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And then make that incision in tepid water, between the hypochondria.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when the parts of his body have been softened, then perform for him the fumigation with myrtle and pause that action for him.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when you have smoked it for an hour, then make her sit on a chair, and then make her sneeze and open her mouth wide, and lift her up from there, and press the lower part of her abdomen with gentle pressure, for the matter will soon be expelled.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the baby comes out according to this form, then you gently insert their small hands little by little; and then the woman should be placed on her side, with his feet hanging down, and she should be lying on some surface, and cover their hands.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And then press on the abdomen of the patient little by little, and then extract what is under their feet from between the ears into a prepared container placed below. 
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the wind has not passed, then take their feet and move them vigorously, and then press what is over the hypochondriac regions little by little until the wind rises to the upper parts.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And then insert your fingers and gradually spread the wound little by little, and command the woman to strain herself while the wound is being sutured. 
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Exuding from the side longitudinally hanging one of his hands.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Be ingenious in reducing the arm of him, but if you cannot reduce it, then elevate the limb and let it be so.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if he cannot walk, then make him lie on the ground, and shake his thighs with a strong vibration, and then administer ointments that are made and compounded of mucilages.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if childbirth has occurred, then make the woman sit on a chair, and then focus on reducing the swelling, aligning the part according to its natural shape, and make the woman sneeze and command her to compress herself internally until it is properly set in place. 
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Emission from the act over the neck expands his arms and the surface of him is on the side of his mother.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	It is necessary that the midwife hold the hand of the infant and then turn it little by little, so that this happens with ease.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is mixed and how much is mixed, then apply over the anus what we have recommended of oil and poultices.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And then command him to moan little by little, and once you have done that, now place that censer on an altar and command her to incline over the right side, and then command him to be compressed; and make that person sneeze with a condition.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The translation of the given line would be:
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When they say to remove the horrifying things from the main area according to this method, consider it, and then you cut with your fingernail in order that the moisture be evacuated.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the tumor is hanging over their face and neck, then you should incise it at the base, so that it is not retained and does not cause death.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	Then push the tumor into the areas where you need to place it, and instruct the woman to compress herself several times, and it will be expelled with a light discharge, if God so wills.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The outcome of twin births or multiple fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that twins are often born, and sometimes three or four are born, though this is rare and seldom happens; however, their causes are from nature, not life. 
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And among those, even if they are multiplied, a second one, and they are separated by a ciphac (likely referring to some kind of separator or interval), distinguish these within the ligament at the navel of each of them. And sometimes they are expelled as though done by a light natural secretion, and sometimes they come out due to an uncommendable emission, just as we have recounted.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if there are difficulties in childbirth and you reach a point where we have discussed about unnatural presentations, then you should treat those cases as we have recounted.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is skilled and does this with ease and subtlety, and with care, and is ingenious according to every figure according to how it is prepared by the ingenuity bringing to health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remembrance of that which is formed in the womb from embryos and aborts.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Here is the translation of the provided medieval medical text line by line into English:
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all of this must be within the knowledge of the midwife who sees this slight resemblance of it, and thus applies herself to it with what is necessary.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Capitol .lxxvi.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	From the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you treat a dead fetus according to the methods we have mentioned in the section on medication and it has not been expelled, and you must use manual operation, then you should consider whether the woman is of sound health and not subject to any accidents that might cause her harm.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then the woman should be placed face down on the bed with her head slightly lowered and her thighs raised.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the minister should hold her at both ends or she should be tied to the bed so that her body does not move during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	Then you should moisten the mouth of the uterus with humid oils and with a mucilage made from coltsfoot, fenugreek, and its own seeds.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	Then anoint the midwife's hand with those oils and mucilages, and then insert her hand easily into the uterus. Then search with her hand for the place where she can grasp the fetus with her fingers.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And it is appropriate in this case: then you consider if the position is prepared so that you can descend upon his head, and now you insert the hooks into his holes, or into the neck, or into the mouth, or into the palate, or under the beard, or into the collarbone, or into the areas near the ribs, or under the hypochondria.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	But if the discomfort is in the patient's feet, then [it occurs] at the heel, or in the middle of the back.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And it is necessary to hold the instrument with the right hand, and place its curvature in that spot which is between the fingers of the left hand, and insert the hand easily so as to put the instrument into one of those places we have mentioned, until reaching the swollen cause.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then place and keep another person in the appropriate position next to him, or a third if necessary, so that the traction is equal, and not just according to its straightness alone.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And it should be massaged all over so that the discharge from him may be relieved just as is done in the radical cure of toothaches.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And one must apply to him what is between them so that the extension may be softened; and if any part of him is retained, then it is necessary for the midwife to anoint some of her fingers with oil and skillfully insert those and revolve with them what is retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore, if part of the fetus is stuck, then the positions should be changed until it becomes easier; do this until the entire fetus is delivered.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if one hand is extended before the other and it is not possible to reduce that due to the constriction of the birth canal, then a cloth should be wrapped around that hand; then extract that until it is all delivered, and incise that either at the joint of the hand or at the wrist.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And thus you must do the same on the other hand and on both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	And if the head of the abscess is large, or you encounter compression during the incision, or it is at the site where fluid has gathered tightly, then you must insert between the fingers a spina (a type of instrument) and split the head and drain the fluid, or use an instrument named “alundat,” the form of which will come with the forms of other instruments in the chapter that follows this one.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And similarly, if the abscess has a large head by nature, then you must incise it with a scalpel, or take hold of it with an alundel as we have said; then remove the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head has been incised and is compressed, you should split it open so that the moisture within the feet can be drained out.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	But if it is not complicated and does not require incision, then you should incise the head as soon as it seems possible to you.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the lower part of the abdomen has an abscess or is dropsical, then you must puncture it to allow the fluid within to be drained.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	And if the condition affects their feet, then the attraction of it is slight and the direction of it towards the mouth of the vein is slight.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	And if the abdomen and feet are constricted, then you must extract that with a cloth which you will have wrapped around your hand, and cut open the abdomen and feet so that what is inside may flow out. 
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	If the other limbs are stiff and the head returns, then the midwife inserts her left hand; but if the mother's mouth is open, she then puts her hand into the birth passage, and seeks with that hand for the head, and pulls it in with her fingers into the mother’s mouth, and then inserts a finger or two fingers, and pulls it in with those.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the womb is constricted by an abscess that affects the uterus, then it should not be disturbed; first, you must administer a discharge of moist and fatty substances.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And administer plasters; and follow up by bathing the patient in waters that soften and moisturize.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the procedure is on the patient's side, then puncture it if possible; and administer what we have mentioned to the live wound.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if this is not possible, then cut it into pieces and extract it.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And it is necessary that you do not leave any cause within the second layer.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all of your procedure, then administer what we have said about the treatment to the swellings that occur due to the incision.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if bleeding occurs, then bathe in astringent waters and administer the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have seen a woman whose fetus in the womb was dead, and then she became pregnant again, and afterwards the fetus died once more.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happened to someone that a swelling occurred in their abdomen; and it swelled inside until it was cut open, and they began to discharge pus.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called to his care, and treated him for a long time, but the plague did not subside.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I placed on him several strong adhesive plasters for some causes, and extracted a bone from him, and after passing some days, I extracted another bone; and I was very amazed because there were no bones in his abdomen.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then I thought that they were the bones of a dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then I treated the plague, and extracted many bones from him, the woman existing in his very subtle dispositions, and he lived in this manner for a long time, curing him of a small arm issue. 
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I do not intend to be strange, but rather because in this lies knowledge and help for the physician who administers treatment with their hands.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of an instrument with which the mother is cut open:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of a stretcher on which the limbs are placed, where there are two supports at the two ends of the two feet.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	However, this support must be more delicate than the stretcher and should be made of either iron or wood.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the width of each rod should be two digits and the margin of each by two one digit, and the length of each is one and a half palms; and in the middle of the two rods there are two joints made of the same material which are already fixed, the length of which is about half a palm and a little more, and the width of each is two digits or a little more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additives should be inserted into the mouth of the wound so that it is opened with them when you turn the two prescribed instruments.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	Here is the translation of the sentence:
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you wish to open the womb with those [methods], then make the woman lie on her back with her feet hanging down, and open what is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then open your hand with the instrument just as you would with scissors, cutting according to the amount you want from the opening of the mouth of the womb before the midwife does what she wants.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of dizziness which the ancients said:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Form of pressing with which the fetus is pushed:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is similar to forceps which have teeth at the end, like pincers, and sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, like pincers, which have teeth like saw teeth with which it is incised and contorted. 
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of emesis preparation:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Forma de unci havent una spina:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Forma de unci havent doas spinas:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of forceps with teeth that clamp with which the head of the fetus is compressed:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Forma de dos espatums latz:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All those instruments are exercised, and when more of their kinds are multiplied and prepared, the artisans become lighter in their operation and more skilled due to their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And you should not use any of those instruments at all, for the necessity of them is not excusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	For the extraction of the wisdom tooth.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the wisdom tooth is hindered from growing, then you should command the patient to hold their breath, and then make them sneeze with condizi (a substance to induce sneezing), and press your hand over their mouth and nose, and if it comes out like this, it is good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then take an olla (pot) and pierce a hole in the lid, and place therein burning herbs under the mouth of the patient, such as calamus, ruta (rue), anethum (dill), chamomilla (chamomile), squaw vegetable (scichos arabicus), cassia lignea (cassia bark), and santoreya (santolina).
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All of these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water in the pot, and place that pot over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then place a reed tube in the mouth of the patient, and keep it there until the vapor reaches the cavity of the patient.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then make that person sneeze as we have said, and the second one will be expelled quickly. 
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	Here is the translation of the provided text into English:
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Before it is necessary to change sides, right and left, with ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And then adjust the amount of traction, for it will obey and avoid adherence.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the mother is constricted, we have already recommended treatment with sneezing and with medication using herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	But if it is not expelled by all the causes which we have recommended, then be careful not to strain too much in attempting to extract it. However, it must be that what has been emitted from him into the mother's mouth reaches the thigh of the woman, and then anoint it with grease and a fourfold remedy; for this will cause it to ripen over several days and will dissolve and be expelled.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	However, when it ripens, the bad humor rises to the head and to the stomach, causing illness; therefore, it is necessary to administer fumigations and appropriate treatments for this condition.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	However, some of the Ancients have expressed that fumigation with henbane and dried figs is useful.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Method of using an instrument with which the woman is fumigated for the retention of menses and the second stage of labor:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It seems like this text is in an old or constructed language that has elements of Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. I'll attempt
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And place the narrow end in the ash and the wide end over the fire, and let the fumigation rest on the embers of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And keep it there until that fumigation is consumed and repeat with another one.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	On the treatment of the infant's undamaged anus.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Some children are born with their anus not perforated, which is a narrow and obstructed opening.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then it is necessary for the midwife to pierce that opening with her finger; and if not, pierce it with a sharp spatula, and be careful not to touch the bladder.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	Then place wool soaked in wine and oil over that area; then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	But if you fear that it is obstructed, then insert a catheter into the passage for several days, and remove it when the infant needs to defecate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And already the obstruction of the anus occurs due to consolidation from a plaque or an abscess; then it is necessary that this consolidation be incised, and then it should be treated with what we have said about treatment and lead.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	For the treatment of fistulas that develop below:
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that appear in the lower part, leaving pus, are swollen and large; those appearing near the anus externally or in the space of the lower part.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is a fistula or abscess.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that swelling is old and runs with white phlegm or subtle corruption, and sometimes these fistulas are penetrating.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those that penetrate are known by what is discharged from them by excretion and flatulence; and sometimes the patient suffers from this discharge, and it is forcibly expelled as worm-like substances.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And sometimes these fistulas penetrate into the space between the bladder and into the penis tissue; and some of them penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the hip bone.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And the way to distinguish a penetrating fistula from a non-penetrating one is by inserting your finger into the anus, and then carefully inserting a thin probe of reed or metal into the fistula when there is no turbulence.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if there is turbulence in that area, then insert a thin probe made of lead or horsehair until you feel the probe or the hair with your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel any movement or do not find any cause of obstruction, digestion, worms, or flatulence as we have said, then know that it is impermeable, and therefore pay attention to the treatment.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the flesh of the penis, then its significance is that it causes urine to leak from there and prevents the area from being consolidated with medicine.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	If it penetrates into the joint of the thigh or inside the bone and you find pain in the area around it, then a sign of this is that you probe deeply within there if there isn't a curvature in the bone, and you feel pain around the affected part; and that from it there is always pus; and that it does not heal with that treatment, nor is it consolidated with ointment.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those fistulas that penetrate, the cure is not complete, and the treatment for them requires the skill and subtlety of experienced doctors on which they rely.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	However, in those cases that do not penetrate deeply and are not chronic, healing with iron is hoped for, as I will recommend to you, and this is what I have already proven.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And the patient should lie between your hands on their back and raise their legs upwards, with the thighs inclined towards their abdomen. Then insert a lead probe, or a reed if there is a curvature in the fistula, until you feel where the probe goes deeply.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if the patient feels pain around the neck, now you must insert your index finger into the neck.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel in your finger the attempt already by itself to penetrate uncoveredly, or what you feel between your finger and that skin or flesh, then you know certainly that it is penetrating; and then do not work on that area, for there is no healing there, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	However, some say that it is beneficial for some men later.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And of the treatment by which improvement is hoped for in him, you are to make a fine cautery according to the width of the fistula, as was previously stated, and introduce that ignited cautery into the fistula until it reaches around the neck; then repeat this two or three times until you know that all those fistulated flesh parts, which resemble feather shafts, have been properly adhered together.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then treat it with cloths wrapped in ointment until all those adhered flesh parts are removed, and then treat it with medicines that generate and consolidate the flesh. If it is healed, that is good; and if not, it will never be healed by any other treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if you insert a probe inside, and it does not penetrate into your finger which is in the anus, and between that finger and the probe there lies a layer of flesh or membrane, and twist the fistula so that its surface aligns with the cord, then dry the cord from the beginning of the fistula, and use the probe to dry it inside the fistula until the drying reaches the point where the tip of the probe is located, and through this, liberation and cutting are achieved.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then clean those fistulous flesh that resembles a bird feather tube and do not break any of them for any reason.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	And if a flow of blood should come between you and your operation when you are dissecting those tissues, then the best thing to do is use the lightest instrument for cauterization with fire or sharp medicine, because cautery with fire has two good properties: it is both adhesion of those tissues being joined together, and drying out of the blood through desiccation of the moistures.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	Then treat that area with cloths wrapped in boiled or crushed leaves placed on the wound, and then heal the sore using ointments that generate and strengthen tough flesh.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And these medicines have astringent and drying properties; when they are restored, the wound is healed and you need not fear recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	But if the fistula has already penetrated into the rectum and extends from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the rectum and probe with it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And if during the examination there is only a veil of tissue or flesh between you and it, and penetration is easy, then this is not an operation but rather a matter of trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	Here is the translation of the provided text line by line into English:
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the fistula is treated in this manner: it is when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it is on the side of the buttocks around the surface of the body with the chain and at the edge of the buttocks, then take a probe with a perforated end, which is like a needle used for preparing arrows in this way:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	And insert into that area enveloped by five fingers or around them; and then insert a finger into the fistula until you reach its cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	If it is necessary to penetrate the margin of the anus from inside, then you extract the thread from that place as if you were inserting your finger into the anus; and pull out the end of the thread and tie both ends together tightly, and leave this for one or two days, and when it is time, cut the thread in the flesh, pressing well within so that the flesh which is between the two ends of the thread is cut off.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	Then treat the wound until it is healed and consolidated.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	But if the openings of the fistula are not penetrable, then make them penetrable in whatever way you find suitable, but ensure there is movement in the pus, for it is not proper to do so as to cut into the tendon; and then treat it until it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The form of the spiked spatula with which the fistula is split open: the curvature of which is sharply pointed and the other part is not sharp, so that you do not cut what is not necessary, as is often needed.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	On sewing hemorrhoids in which blood flows at the incision of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And of those which are small and large, and from which the blood flows continuously and is one, and with clots, and outside the anus, and at the extremities.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	And however, those that affect the rectum are according to the months of little humidity, from which yellow water or a bit of blood flows continuously, and according to the color of the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the treatment for that which is inside the anus is to command the patient to sit and to strain themselves so that the anus stretches and the hemorrhoids appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you take care and suspend them with hooks or hold them with your nails, and then cut those veins at their roots.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	But if the joints are not affected by moisture and softening of those areas, then take those [areas] with a rough cloth or wool batting, and extract them with your fingers as directed, and then incise them and sprinkle certain known powders over them near the incision so that they serve in place of cauterization; or cauterize them according to what is detailed in the chapter on cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then treat those areas with other treatments until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the stool does not come out easily, then use a clyster on the patient with a small bite and wash it with the water in the cooled mixture that allows for a gentle evacuation when the patient is squeezed. 
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	And if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then their cause is trivial, and you should take them with your fingernail, or use a pair of forceps to grasp them, cut them, and then treat them as we have said until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And for the incision that you make, you should administer suturing in this manner: take thread wrapped and insert it into a needle, then pull the hemorrhoids to the points above, and penetrate with the needle at the edge of the other side. Wrap both ends of the thread on the part farthest from the needle transversely; tighten the hemorrhoid strongly with the suture, and then tie the thread and remove the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this to all of them, but leave one of them open and do not sew it up, so that the excess blood can flow out from that one.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	Then place over the anus a cloth infused with rose oil or ointment; put that on the area and instruct the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then place that inside the cavity; and when it is inflamed, treat those with ointments or other treatments until it is healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	On the treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	White spots occur due to drying of a wound or by natural constriction.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And when they are old and no longer respond to that medicine, then you must scrape those spots with the tip of a spatula or with your fingernail until they become moist and the pus that forms on top is removed, which prevents them from healing; then treat them until they consolidate.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then you remove those [spots] with more vigorous scraping than the first until blood comes out and they are raw; then treat them until they are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	On the treatment of hemorrhoids, this is crucial.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that alamermar, which is crucial, appears as round spots according to the color of the body, resembling the head of a clove, and it occurs all over the body but mostly on the feet and toes, and sometimes causes significant pain.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then it is necessary to cut what is around the nail, hold it with tweezers or forceps, and remove it from its root; and then care for that area.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize the wound that is described in the preceding chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	And a wart is a small, rough, tubular, round elevation on the surface of the body, and they often appear on the hands of children. 
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And the cure for it is that you stretch and incise that area, or that you bandage that with cloth or with hair inside which is cut.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize it, as we have said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And already the warts, both regular and inverted, have been removed with the instrument that I will describe.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	And the "mays formica" is a small, hairy or tubular prominence on the surface of the body that moves when touched, and when cold encounters it, it causes a sensation similar to being bitten by an ant, and it forms around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And the cure for it is that you take a quill from an eagle or a vulture, and let it be strong, and place that over the wart so that it is contained within the circle of the quill; then rotate your hand with the quill until you cut out what is in the circumference of the wart, and press that into the flesh around it, and root out the wart from its base.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, do this with a reed or iron tube according to this method:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Let the part above the tube be tapered and closed (that is, not perforated), wrapped in such a way that when placed on the finger, it fits snugly and allows for rotation.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you want to cauterize the wart as mentioned earlier in the section on cautery of warts in the chapter of cauterization.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	Regarding the shape of the instruments that are used to give chrism.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Sometimes chrism is made of silver or brass or melted and beaten metal; and sometimes it is made with small and large instruments according to those to whom it is administered, for the one that is given in the healing of small children should be small; and for those whose butts are sore or painful, the chrism containers for them should be small. 
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of large and small chrysteries:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the cannula at the top, where the bag is tied, should be wide according to this manner; and it should be positioned apart from where the bag is tied in such a way. 
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the lower extremity of the pus, which is inserted into the anus, is plugged (so it is not open) to prevent leakage; on one side there are two tracks, and on the other side one track, and the width of the track is according to the thickness of the rays, making them slightly thicker. 
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And let there be a bag in which are placed the medicines of animal bladder or sheepskin, and its size is one palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be pierced by thick threads in such a way that it is twisted; and if the space between the threads is as thick as a finger.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then introduce into those areas strong brine made from fresh figs or around those; and adjust with that the bag; and when the bag is placed on him, it should be tight at the head of the rectum between two distinct points with strong compression; and then cleanse each area with that: However, the quality of cleansing with that is to fill the bag with the medicine, which should be warmed according to the amount the patient can tolerate; and beware lest it be too hot or too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And then the patient should be placed on their back, and lift their thighs up and place them on a pillow or something similar; and then anoint the tip of the cautery with oil or egg white or fenugreek mucilage or the like; and then insert that into the anus easily; and then the assistant takes the bag and squeezes it with both hands and repeatedly with force until everything in the rectum is evacuated into the bowel; and then remove the catheter and the patient raises their thighs to the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces it to sweat, let it do so as much as possible; and if one sleeps with that for an entire night, it is better for healing.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	If you anoint that person in the illnesses of diarrhea and their vomiting troubles, then you repeatedly apply the cautery until it is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if hemorrhoids or abscesses are found in the anus, then use a gentle and strong suppository, of the type with which children are treated.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Of the treatment of the plagues.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	Here is the translation line by line:
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, it is said that the plagues are diverse according to how the plagues are caused and according to the place upon which the plagues fall. 
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes by which many times plagues are caused are thus: throwing of stones, or cutting with a sword or knife, or striking with a lance, or with clubs, or with arrows, or similar to those multiple causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I am recommending the treatment of some diseases for which you should apply that reasoning and rule to other ailments.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will begin with simple headaches, for the discussion of compound headaches will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Thus, when you encounter a simple headache in the head and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it is due to an increase of stones or similar substances, and has already stretched the vein significantly enough to cause great pain and you fear there might be an abscess forming, then you should be cautious and perform venesection on the cephalic vein immediately; do not delay this; and extract as much blood according to the strength of the patient unless there is any prohibiting cause for venesection, especially if the blood that has been discharged from the pain is small.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And the venesection should be performed on the opposite side of the affected area; and the patient should be guarded against relapse and should avoid wine and heavy foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if there is any contraindication due to delicacy or some other cause, then reduce the food intake and avoid meat and wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And place on the affected area, if there is an abscess, some cloth soaked in olive oil or wine in which a styptic has been applied.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed that condition, then apply ointments until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	And if the wound is large or results from a sharp and similar instrument, and the edges of it cannot be brought together with pillows, then bring those edges together with sutures as I will describe regarding the suturing of them.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	But if the wound has already exposed the bone and sinew, and there is no retention of it except for a small support, then incise that area and subsequently treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh by placing it in position, and order the patient to be nourished with foods rich in nutrients: eggs and form a diet similar to them until it is healed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find putrefaction in the wound that does not adhere to the bone, then you should incise all of that rotten part and remove it, and subsequently treat it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	But if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which bleeding can occur and it cannot be stopped by medicines, then you should probe the artery; and if you find that it has not been cut, then incise it with a spatula or ligate it. And if necessity demands that what we have said does not suffice, then cauterize until the bleeding is stopped.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these sores are simple and small, then the cause of them is slight; in this way you powder over those this powder, which solidifies that before the air changes those.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the method of the powder is this: take oil of vipers one part, dragon's blood two parts, unextincted charcoal three parts; all should be finely ground and sieved, and with it fill the wound, and apply it under good compression until it adheres well, and let it clot with the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And then bind that area with pillows and leave it like that, and do not loosen it while it is thus until the inflammation subsides, for the medicine within will not be expelled until it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes this is done alone as cautery, when you do not have at hand the ashes and dragon's blood.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this method is used in large wounds when it is necessary to place it over them and keep them tight, especially for fresh wounds with their blood, which have not been altered by the air.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, especially during summer, then it is not intended to use this powder on them. Instead, treat them with what we have mentioned, such as placing certain types of ointments over them, or covering them with flour mixed with water and honey until they develop pus; then treat them with another remedy until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	But if the wound is accompanied by a fracture in the bone, and it is small, then you should extract it with gestures [likely meaning careful manipulation or handling].
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I will describe the treatment of skull fractures in what is venomous or poisonous. 
De las plaguas del col.	From the afflictions of the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	But if the affliction occurs in the neck, there is no difference in treatment, and it is the same as the affliction of the head when it is simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	But if the nerves or arteries of the neck are cut, then if it is a nerve, no treatment should be applied that causes strong astringency, such as zinc and vitriol, which bind and constrict the nerves too much.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not apply any source of cold to the affliction, because the substance of the nerves is cold and their continuation is connected to the brain, which is the most sensitive part of all the members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it is treated with mild medicines, such as washing with warm water, sometimes infused in oil, whether roasted or unroasted, and thyme when washed with warm water, along with other small stones according to this method, and moist ointments.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the affliction is large, then administer stitches, or bring the edges together, and then treat it with poultices until it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	And if there is depth in the wound or you encounter pus and decay at the lowest part of it, then pierce it at the deepest affected area.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	But if in the wound an artery is already cut and bleeding has occurred, then tie it off, dry it out, or cauterize it if the situation requires such action.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the vertebrae of the neck have already been cut through entirely and the veins of the neck are saved, then you should suture the edges of the wound over the bone of the neck without touching it; first align it and return it to its natural shape, then secure it with appropriate binding, and leave it like that for several days; afterwards treat it with ointments that have astringent and stimulant properties until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	But if the wound has caused a fracture in the bone, then pound it [possibly meaning to reduce swelling or soften the area], and if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all those that you can; leave what you cannot reach inside until the wound becomes pus-filled, and let it separate, thus alleviating the inflammation.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the wound is recent, then sprinkle over it the powder that has been recommended to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	And if the wound has formed an ulcer, then treat it with what will be discussed in more detail in the subsequent chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Regarding wounds to the neck or similar injuries when inflicted between the shoulders, whether caused by a spear, sword, lance, or similar weapons.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a puncture from a lance or sword, and you measure the depth of the wound, then consider whether gas escapes when the patient breathes; if so, know that the wound is mortal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is no deep penetration and the wound is fresh with its own blood, then you should apply powder to it within the first hour; do not prevent it so that the blood does not remain in the depth of the wound and return to the heart, which could harm the patient. Instead, apply an attractive ointment to it, and dress it twice a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the ointment is not available to you, then apply a piece of cloth to the wound's opening to absorb the moisture that comes out. And have the patient lie in such a way that the fluid within the wound can drain out.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	If more than three days have passed since the plague began and you do not observe spasms or tremors of a bad heart, nor constriction of the breath in the patient, and if other good dispositions are seen from them, then know that the plague is survivable; therefore treat it with poultices and other cures until it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	But if the healing of it is delayed, and too much time has passed open, then know that a fistula has formed; therefore treat it according to its chapter [likely meaning "according to the appropriate method"].
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the wound is caused by a cut from a sword or knife, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or back, then treat it with stitching if it is large, or with powder if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	But if the bone has already become infected and parts of it are cut away, then you should turn the wound and probe to extract those pieces, if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	But if they are not separated, then leave them inside until the wound becomes pus-filled, which will make their extraction easier.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other accidental plagues in other parts of the body, the aid in cure is the aid of what we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the ailments of the abdomen.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The discomfort that occurs in the abdomen can be either severe, mild, or moderate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	In severe cases, you will see the intestines or nerve of the intestines, because their insertion and suturing need to be more forceful and more precise. 
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And a small dislocation is made difficult by another method, and it seems that their reduction is more difficult if you do not attend to their intrusion into their place immediately, because once opened and thickened, the insertion becomes difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And thus the best disruption is intermediate, for in that one it is not difficult to return the intestine, just as it is difficult in both of the previously mentioned types.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And you should know that there are four ways to suture the abdomen, but two methods of suturing are common and apply to wounds in other parts of the body as well.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other specific sutures connect to other wounds, but they are more proper for the suturing of the belly.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I recommend to you each with exposition and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore, I say that when the wound is small and some part of the intestine has slipped through it, and it becomes difficult to reduce it, then this happens in one of two ways: either due to the small size of the rupture as we have said, or when the intestine has become inflamed due to the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And so when this happens, then you must soften that area by soaking a sponge or cloth in warm water alone, or boil it in vinegar with cyperum and spice, and apply it to the intestine until the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And sometimes it is done in the way that has astringency, and it is better than just water alone for reducing inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And so when you see the inflammation resolved, then moisten the intestine with water in which althea and mallows have been boiled, for this alleviates the irritation of it with little effort.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if it is necessary to relieve the irritation before this treatment, then cut the rupture slightly with an instrument with which you would incise hemorrhoids.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first treatment is better when it is appropriate that there be no drying out, and no effort should be made to dry it near necessity and deficiency.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	From the instrument, its form is as follows:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of the sharp wound, and the other part not-sharp, and the extremity subtle, and not be like the subtlety of a spatula, but rather somewhat blunt.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And so when the inflammation has increased and you have removed the intestine, it is then necessary that its reduction should follow its natural form, in its proper place, if possible according to this method, for it is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	And when the disruption is large and is in the lower part of the abdomen, then you must have the patient lie on their back, and raise their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then you raise the patient's head and feet higher than the other parts.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then always direct your attention and consideration so that the part where the inflammation is should be higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus you should administer this method in both severe inflammations and moderate inflammations.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in small inflammations, place what you have prepared, and then have the assistant stand between your compassionate hands, who should hold the disruption entirely with their hand and align its edges, and then suture it from one end to the other as closely as possible.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of suturing: first take the needle, or a count of needles according to the quantity of the width of the wound; and then leave from the extremity of the disruption of the ring finger, and hold the needle tightly, one end such that you do not put thread in both ends of the chain; with both ends of the suture which are left behind within the separated parts, between which you make it penetrate through that part; and you have already added together both ends of the chain and both ends of the suture, and so four orders are made.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And then strengthen with double thread around the needle's circuit, and sometimes on both sides together, and then bring together the two lips and the wound by proper approximation; and then leave the thickness of a finger and put another needle there, and then tie that one with thread just as you did with the first needle; and do not stop doing this if it is necessary with needles until you have completed the entire constriction of the wound.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And let the needles be of medium thickness between thick and fine, for fine needles lightly penetrate the flesh; and thick ones are difficult to insert into the wound, and therefore by this reason they should be of medium fineness and thickness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And it is not necessary to insert the needle at both ends of the wound immediately, so that the flesh is not lightly cut and the wound can close before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And let the stitches not be too long so that the wound is not prevented from consolidating.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then sharpen the ends of the needles so that they do not bother the patient during their sleep; and place on the stitches small pads from various materials, which cover the ends of the needles; and leave them in place until you know that the wound is already consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And these types of stitches with needles in this manner are more suitable for small wounds, where only one or two needles are enough for the stitching or around those areas.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the second suture is communal: and it is that you administer with a suture the four extremities, of the chain and two extremities of the spine, at once, with a needle in which the thread should be wrapped equally in fineness and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And then when you have penetrated these four extremities with the needle, withdraw the needle from that same part where you began, so that the thread draws out all the pus from the deepest part of the wound, so that the suture is like a cloth stitch with which cloths are sewn together.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And pause between each suture the width of the smallest finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this suture knows the men (This suture is known to men). 
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And with such a suture, I sewed the wound that had been inflicted on a man in his abdomen which was stabbed by a knife, and it was a rupture of the wound larger than a palm, and the intestines were exposed about two palms around the middle area, and there was disruption in the middle of the member; and then I returned the intestine after it had protruded from the wound for twenty-four hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the plague was consolidated in the space of fifteen days or thereabouts, and cured that one who is healed; and then this lasts for many years, and it is transformed into its dispositions.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And the other doctors had judged that he could not be healed; and by a miracle it was cured, for I did not treat him with ointment, for I was in a place where ointment was not found nor any medicine, but placed upon the wound an old cloth twice a day and washed it diligently with honey water until it was cured.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	But I will describe two types of suture specific according to the narration of Paraula.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And you should begin with chain suturing, and insert the needle from the outer part to the inner part.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And thus, as the needle penetrates into the chain and in that manner continues straight and along the length of the entire body, leave the end of the thread with which you have inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate at the other end from the inner part to the outer part on the other end of the wound.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And when you have made that penetration, then penetrate again in the same end of the wound from the outer part to the inner part; and leave the end of the thread on this side, and make the needle penetrate at the other end from the inner part to the outer part.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And penetrate with that your penetration with which you make that penetrate into the hip at the extremity of the eye which is in the part inside so that all of it penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then begin from this side of the wound and sew that up to the extremity which is on the other side, and remove the needle from the thread that has penetrated, and then return it into that same thread and stitch the extremity of the wound that is on the other side with this extremity of the thread; and withdraw that part of the thread that belongs to the patient. 
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this once and another time, and do this once again repeatedly until you sew up everything that is outside according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the essence of this method of suturing is that you sew with a tendon suture with which you stitch the skin, in such a way that you sew the wound once from the end of the chain, and that you leave that other side open until you have completed it.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	You should place the needle at the end of the thread from your side of the external part, and make it penetrate to the internal part through that same spot; leave both ends of the suture; then turn the needle and make it penetrate from outside to inside through both ends of the suture.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	Then rotate those sutures, and make each one penetrate from the internal part to the external part through both ends of the thread on the opposite side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this method of suturing is better than the common superficial suturing, and it is a type of suturing that precedes deeper closure.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the discourse on gout.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And more specifically, for the suturing of the abdomen, it is corrected using two needles, such that you insert a thread into each needle. Begin with the insertion of the needle from your side and make it penetrate to the other side according to the suturing method used to sew together bodies equally.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And know that when the disruption is in the middle of the abdomen, then suturing it is more difficult than suturing other parts of the abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	But the treatment of plague medicine is judged by other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The sentence provided is a mix of languages with similarities to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. I will translate it line by line into English based on this understanding:
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the wound, then place on that area poultices which you prepare before they become hard like stone and release the bile, and consolidate them carefully and watch over; then treat that as you would the treatment of other wounds until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	And if you do not have the medicines at hand, then place something on that area immediately, as it begins to emit pus and old matter; change this twice a day, as you are taught, until it is healed, for in many conditions you would not need other medication when the wounds are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	But if you fear that the wound might spread to the main limbs, then you must soak lion's wool in high-quality boiled oil or in anointed oil, and place that around the area between the joints and leave it there.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if there is pain or putrefaction in the intestines, for this often occurs, then treat it with black Theban astringent vinegar, especially if the corruption has spread to the intestine and has penetrated into its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And you should know that the condition of the large intestine is easier to heal than that which affects the finer intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is difficult to heal when the intestine, which is called “gegunu,” does not receive healing from plagues that fall upon it entirely; and this is due to the great number of veins within it, the size of those veins, the fineness of its structure, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	But if what you are dealing with from the plague is the membrane, and you obtain it while fresh, return it according to your prescription with which you equally reduce the intestines.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	But if it has passed into the space and is already turned green or black, then when you stretch that area with a thread over the spot that is discolored, to cause bleeding, because in the membrane there are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	Then incise what is another layer of the membrane, and place the two ends of the thread hanging from the part where the plague has exited, so that you may alleviate the tension of it by lifting the membrane and releasing the arm of the plague.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembrance of the plagues when they occurred in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When there is a rupture in the intestine and it is small, then it may be possible to repair it in some people; for this reason I saw one who was wounded in his abdomen by a lance strike, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old and had become a fistula, causing gas and flatulence.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then I considered the treatment of him already knowing that he was not fixed in his recovery, but stopped subtlety interfering within where the fire heals and the area is consolidated. 
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And I also fear that after the area has been properly secured, something might happen to the patient causing harm in their belly; and they do not suffer from this bad accident while eating and drinking in their usual ways, and then bathe and exercise as they please.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And already some experienced ones have said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, then it must be tied according to this method: and that you take ants with large heads; then adjust the two lips of the wound and place an ant from those which have their mouth open over the two lips of the wound; so when they bite onto those and tighten their mouths, cut off the head of the ant, because it adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	Then place another ant next to the first one, and do not stop doing this with ants placed one next to the other according to the quantity of the entire wound.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	Then bring that area back and close the wound; let those heads remain attached inside the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not cause any harm to the patient.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestine be tied with fine thread which is made from the intestine of an animal attached to it, since it is finer; and you take the end of this intestinal thread, ensuring it is stripped of any flesh, then tie the end of it with thread wrapped around it, and insert that thread into needles and sew with that the intestine, and reduce that in the disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this method of stitching with ants is nothing more than a second way of trust and hope. 
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	And if the wound is large and extensive, especially if it is in one of the delicate intestines, for then there is not a remedy but suturing, and it is not a complete cure.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	For the treatment of scabies and fistula.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that any plague or abscess when it becomes corrupted and grows old, and an ulcer is formed, and if it does not heal and continuously discharges pus without being separated, then, regardless of which part of the body it affects, it is generally called a fistula, and we call it azukem.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And fistula, truly, is a warty, hard, white swelling that is not painful and has a cavity like the head of a bird's feather; and for this reason it is called "rizatz," which means head.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And in some men, there is moisture that produces sweat; and strongly, this moisture is reduced over several hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And sometimes this humidity is moved, and it is small, and it is thick, and it is subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already said in the division when I mentioned the plagues, that any ulcer which is not healed nor is it in raw flesh, is so because of one of these causes: of which one is either due to a lack of blood in the body; or because of its malice; or where between it and the lips there is hard flesh preventing the birth of new flesh; or when it is of light material; or when that ulcer itself becomes corrupted and the matter mixed with it is of poor quality; or when the medicine used for its cure is inappropriate; or when corruption falls in the region, and there is pestilence; or due to the nature of the region as seen in Saragossa, where difficult digestion of diseases occurs, and the natural healing of abscesses is delayed; or when it contains a bone or pieces of bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	And I have shown all those causes and their signs, and the cure of them with medicines in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And it is also necessary for me to make you know the treatment of fistula, which is performed by surgical operation with my hand.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And know that fistula can occur in all the members of the body; for among those, there are fistulas that affect large veins and arteries, or nerves, or the spine, or the intestine, or the bladder, or some of the ribs, or some of the vertebrae of the back, or some of the composite joints such as those of the hand and foot; and those which are near the principal part of the member and similar areas.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And thus one of these fistulas that is treated in this manner is among the diseases difficult to heal, and it does not receive a cure, and the occupation with it involves labor and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if there are some fistulas the depth of which does not reach these places that I have mentioned, and you hope for and rely on the cure of it, and wish to gain knowledge of it, then take a probe of iron or of bronze, and if the fistula runs straight, explore it with this tool.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	If the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a thin lead probe, for lead, because of the lightness of its body, is flexible and can follow the twists.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula contains horrible growths, it is not possible for you to probe it with a probe.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then cleanse the openings through their own openings, for the liquid with which you irrigate it will follow the other openings and flow out from them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	Then carefully examine in whatever manner is possible for you to know if there are bones or nerves here, and whether the depth of the fistula is deep or shallow, or if it is a fistula with multiple openings, and do this with all your strength, through your probing, with which you probe the patient, and discover the source of the pain by pressing with your hand on the area, and similar signs and accidental causes related to the abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And after you have stood over all those causes with true examination, then proceed to the treatment according to confidence: that is, consider now whether it is an apparent fistula nearby or in a salty place, far from a joint, or from a nerve, or from an artery, or from a vein, or from one of the places which I have mentioned to you.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And now you dry the fistula as was said before from the nose of him, and remove what is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and what has grown in the opening of the flesh, or of tissue and similar things, and heal that inside so it may be healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	And if the fistula is of deep origin and runs straight, then you must incise it as much as possible to your ability, and then clean all its corrupted flesh; then apply poultices wrapped in sharp medicines, and insert them into the cavity of the fistula which you have grasped with an iron instrument.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do this several times until the sharp medicine corrodes all that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula from the corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore it with ointments that will generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	And if it is not healed by this method, then you must cauterize it as we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the cause of the fistula is bone and you must be certain of this, then you should investigate it and dry it out as we have recommended, provided that you do not interfere with any vein or nerve or main body part as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	And if the bone is exposed and there is some corruption and blackening in it, then you must scrape that area until all the corruption is stopped; then treat it with something that will cause flesh to grow until it is healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if the arm is not healed and thrown away as it should be, then you know that you have not reached the complete eradication of the corruption; and then you uncover it again and examine it thoroughly to understand the reason for it and cleanse it with your final strength, and then restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And if it is healed, that is good; and if not, then you know that the corruption is in the deep recesses of the body, which has not been reached, and then there is nothing for you to do but to leave that part alone.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is possible for you to extract it, then you should remove it with delicate forceps that are suitable for this task.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there are multiple bones affected, then thoroughly extract all of them, and do not leave any behind for any reason with your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if any cause of moisture hinders you, and there is no fear or error in its incision, then cut those ligaments or muscles if they are present, and free the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	But if you have not prepared to set the bones of your patient, then apply something that can reduce the inflammation to the wound, and leave it in place so that it surrounds those bones with flesh and ligaments, and guard the wound so that it does not become consolidated, and constrain the section which you have incised during your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	However, if you fear, apply to the wound something soaked in oil or a poultice immersed in Egyptian ointment, or in one of the green ointments, for when those ligaments will soften and the bones are separated from their ablation, and that traction is alleviated.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	But if it is a large bone such as the thigh bone or the hip bone or similar ones, and only the surface of it is corrupted, then scrape that area with a sharp instrument just enough to remove that blackness and corruption, and then restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	But if the corrupted part of it is large, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that area by incising entirely in the place where the corruption has spread, and then treat it so that it becomes consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend to you what happens to a man in his thigh so that you use this as an example and aid for your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	Here is the translation line by line:
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then the process is extended over time due to the error of doctors in opening the abscess, and pus material will come out of it, and its healing will be slowly paused until the chest becomes fistulized, and multiple openings are made in it from which all discharge pus and the body's humidity.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then many doctors treated for around two years, and none of them knew more in the art until I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And see the chest of him and the materials that were flowing from those orifices through his body; and already the body of that man was entirely swollen, and its color was yellow.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I inserted the probe into one of those orifices and brought the probe to the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then I examined the holes thoroughly and found those leading to all parts of the chest.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I prepared and incised one of those orifices where I discovered a part of the bone, which was found to be corrupted; it was already dry, corrupted, and blackened; and a part of the chest that had penetrated into the marrow was also corrupted.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I treated what was discovered and prepared of the exposed bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I ensured that only the corruption in the bone was cut out and treated, which I had already identified.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then I applied the restoration of the wound with consolidating medicine for a long time, and it was not consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then I repeated the procedure and exposed the bone again based on the initial exposure, and found continued corruption with the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And search for what appears to me from that corruption, and then I was pierced to perform the cure and restoration of it, and it is not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I discovered on the other side and did not stop incising the small bone bit by bit particularly and performing its restoration, and it was not restored until I cut around about a palm of it, and that which I extracted with its marrow, and then I restored it with medicines, and it was slightly consolidated and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And iteration in the operation and section of it is not necessary unless due to the disposition of its frailty and the lack of tolerance and fear of death, for accidents happen at all times because of the excess of evacuation leading to fainting.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And thus it is fully healed, and there is nothing but hard flesh where the bone was; and its condition is well established in its body, and its function returns; and it is converted in its conditions, and no contrariety occurs during movement nor any harm in any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	However, if there is a prominent bone in an already injured part of the body, then you must cut it according to this method: take a ligament and tie it tightly at the end of that prominent bone, and command someone to hold it taut; use a thicker woolen bandage than the first one; then bind it over the flesh below the bone, and stretch the extremity so that you pull the flesh apart; and thus you uncover the flesh over the area where you wish to cut so that the saw does not touch the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And place a board or plank under the bone properly, for when you do this, it is not forbidden to cut with the saw without touching the corrupted flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And it is necessary that the incision be made gradually over the corrupted area, because if corruption lies in the cavity of the bone and does not appear on its surface to the senses, then force an incision into it again.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, before one part continues with the other, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part of it, then you uncover the flesh from all sides completely; then place wood under it, and then suture that part where the corruption is until the suturing of the other part is continuous.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And let the suture be according to the location of the corruption a little, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and suture the bone where it continues with the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not reasonable but rather a complication.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; however, you must investigate how the corruption appears to you, and then incise that area, and clean it according to whatever method is possible for you, and with every complication be corrected by you, unless there are veins or nerves that would oppose this.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And know which are the saws and the types of saws used to cut these bones vary according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of those, and the thickness of those, and the fineness and largeness and smallness of those, and the hardness and their rarity; therefore it is necessary that you prepare every kind of operation with an instrument suitable for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And know that this operation implies to you the type of instrument you will need; when you have great study and long experience and knowledge of the methods of this art, and witness to the ways of illnesses, so that now you apply what is appropriate from the instruments to every illness.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And I am forming for you at the end of this chapter the list of instruments which you will use as basic with which you will proceed in your practice, which you will experience on others.
Forma de serra:	Form of the saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Forma de autra serra gran:
Forma de ray:	Forma de ray:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	Make the head of this vein in the shape of a star-shaped nail head, and the points on it should be in the form of raised studs.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it is not appropriate that only the ends of the joints be rubbed when they are corrupted, or if the large opening is wide.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Form of razor larger than the others:
Forma de razori menor:	Form of a smaller razor:
Forma de razori lat:	The phrase "Forma derazori lat:" seems to be an
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.
Forma de lu:	The phrase "Forma de lu:" seems incomplete
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Form of the razor in which there is a concavity:  
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Form of razor or subtle method:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Form of instruments with which bones are cut:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Forma de inscisori autra minor:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Form of another incision tool; this resembling a saw, and the end of it is like a pair of scissors, and it is applied in multiple places along the ratio of the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And the end of it is triangular and has a sharp tip.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly, all the causes we have mentioned for razors, scissors, and saws apply.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of the incision of extremities and the suturing of bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	Extremities may swell either due to intrinsic causes or extrinsic causes. If you have treated that corruption with medicines for cure and the cure does not help, or if the corruption spreads to a member without any cause, then you must incise that member where the corruption adheres, so that the patient may escape from death or severe malice which is a greater defect of the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of the one to whom this happens is that the member turns black before it falls off because fire has already consumed it, or you will notice the blackness spreading within that corruption which affects the member and takes over the entire body; therefore, be quick to incise that area.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly, if the cause of the corruption is due to some venomous causes such as from a sea scorpion or viper or rattlesnake and the like.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or the affliction is in the extremity of the finger, then you must incise the finger and do not give space for the corruption to spread into the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly, if you access the hand, then you incise that of the wrist area of the arm, and do not give space for corruption to enter into the arm's flesh.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if you need to cut that area, then incise the arm between the elbow and the joint. 
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if the corruption spreads further and surrounds the hip, then in that case it is the death of the patient; and to administer another cause for this in treatment is an amount of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly do for the foot when corruption overtakes the toe of the foot, then you incise it between one of the joints.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if you take hold of the instep of the foot, then you cut through the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	And if it enters into the elbow, then you cut the arm between the joint of the elbow.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already spread over the elbow, then there is no remedy for it but dismissal, and leave the patient to death.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the method of amputating or tying off the limb is that you tighten the ligature at the part just below where you want to cut, and tighten another ligature above the area; and have the assistant extend one ligature to the parts below, and extend another ligature above it; and you separate the flesh that is between two ligatures with a spatula so that all the flesh is exposed; then it should be cut or tied off.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And it is necessary that cloth be placed on all sides so that the area does not come into contact with anything, and that the patient receives an adjusted wound and a cauterized abscess.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	And if bleeding occurs while you are operating, then you cauterize the area properly, or place on it some powder that staunches the blood; and then return to your treatment until it is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then bind the afflicted limb with bandages as appropriate, and care for it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I remind you of what happened to a man in his foot, this medical incident which I and you recall, which was that an accident turned his foot black due to burning that resembled fire combustion.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that accidental corruption first occurred in his toe and then spread to the entire foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepared himself for medical pus to come out as part of the healing process by applying force to the limb due to the intensity of the pain and burning he experienced, and he cut that foot at the joint, and it was healed.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	A long time ago, that same corruption occurred in the index finger of his hand.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then he came to me, and I performed the procedure of expelling that excess by using some of the medicines that I applied to his hand, followed by cleansing his body; but the excess did not stop and began to spread to another finger until it reached his hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And the patient urged me to cut off his hand, and I did not want to do so hoping that the excess fluid would be expelled on its own, and more than that, I feared the cutting of his dead hand, for the strength of the patient was waning.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And after he departed from me, he returned to his land and I was informed that the man prepared and cut open his entire hand, and he was healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have added this narration only to be helpful regarding what is cut from this disease, and for its meaning by which it should be understood and according to which it should be treated.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	About the treatment of the sinuses and the quality of enemas with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess occurs in fleshy limbs and the space of the abscess is prolonged to form a collection of pus, and then it bursts and perforates, allowing the pus to drain out, leaving the area empty like a vessel, with a covering over it similar to a thin cloth, and no severe corruption has reached it, nor has it affected the bones, nerves, or tendons, it is called a sinus, and it should not be named as a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	However, if the space is prolonged to the point where corruption affects some part of the limb, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the treatment of it is to incise that covering entirely as it twists, especially when it has become thin like cloth, and ensure that it does not adhere to the area due to its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And when you consider the sinew, and if it is large, and the arm that you use should be of fetid odor, then administer aclyster (enema) with Egyptian medicine which consists of equal parts of olive oil, sweet wine, and zinziber (ginger), and they are mixed in a vessel, and heated over the fire until the medicine becomes warm and reaches the consistency of honey.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then you take the necessary amount of it and dissolve it in water and honey; and administer it as an enema to the sinew, strengthen the orifice of it, and leave the medicine in there for a quantity of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then extract it with a scraper; do this for so many days until the sinew is cleansed and the pain is alleviated.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And sometimes it is administered as an enema with ashes water when this medicine is not available to you; and you should take the ashes of vines, put them in water; then mix that and administer it as an enema until you are convinced that the sinew is now cleansed.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the ash water, then administer it as an enema with water and honey, and mix finely ground ginger into it; and administer it with wine and honey mixed, for the property of honey is to cleanse and wash, and the wine adheres to the sinew, especially when the wine has an excess of astringency and dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you do this several times and are satisfied that the vein has been sufficiently treated, then use aclyster (enema) with something that promotes flesh growth in it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And it is that you take unguent of daphnicon and dissolve that with rose oil and styptic wine; or that you administer an enema with some medicines and apply other ointments that have the properties which I have already written about in the treatise on ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the sinus opening is narrow such that the enema tube cannot be received, then you gradually enlarge it with a small tool, and apply a cloth wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it is enlarged.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And similarly, if the opening is too wide, then you should sew the edges together and leave an amount through which the enema can be inserted additionally.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the opening from which the fluid flows is raised towards the upper parts, then dry that area at the lowest point of it so that the fluid can flow out, for when the fluid is constrained in the depth of the sinus, flesh may be generated within.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinus around the lowest part of the bone as you wish, then you must prepare the limb with a treatment that allows the fluid to flow out easily according to what is suitable for you and ensure that no cause of obstruction remains within it.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidating medicines that are placed upon the appropriate vein for this purpose, spreading them on a cloth.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the cloth should be of such great quantity as to cover all of the sinus; and then cut with scissors at the right place in the opening of the sinus, making it slightly wider than the sinus opening; and then extend another piece of linen according to the width of the cut, placing it over that distant part of the sinus opening so that the outflow from the arm is eased, and do not change the large cloth but only once every few days.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	And the one that is over the sinus opening should be changed at all times so that what comes out from the arm can be collected properly. 
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And in order for you to know if what flows from his arm is too much or little, or if it is digested or undigested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And with this, you should consider the site of that vein, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if there is pus formation.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And as your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see the material that is placed over the vein's opening already adhering or beginning to adhere, then on the second or third day, you should loosen it. When you remove the dressing, change the cloth and renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	But if around the vein there is subtle infection, do not despair about its adhesion, for its healing is approaching. This is similar to some people in whom the generation of flesh on their wounds takes time, and others in whom the opposite occurs.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if for many days the arm remains undigested near the vein, then you know that the vein is not adhering; and if the adhesion of the vein is delayed and this prolongs the condition, then you should adjust towards drying out with medicines. If the medicines are moist in their substance and virtue, they should be as dry as a drying ointment like diafinicon when adjusted to reduce excess addition of moisture.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the most recent method for treating it is to take some opoponax and dissolve it in rose oil, and apply it over him as if anointing with its substance, then warm that area for him, and use it accordingly.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And it appears in that action, when there is no arm [injury], according to the diagnosis, honey which should be boiled until it thickens, and use it; or take myrrh and aloe and sesame, mix all of them and sprinkle over the honey while it's on the fire, then spread this mixture on cloth and apply that on the wound; and spread the one with the honey you have boiled until it thickened, sprinkle over cloth and bind that.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And sometimes they are administered with aristologia longua and roots of the celestial lily (which is the celestial lily) and flour of iron and centaury, use those simples or mixtures, crush them and sieve them and sprinkle over the honey that has been thickened; and apply it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the wound is prolonged and does not heal with this treatment, then you know that the corruption is in the depth of it, and now investigate in the bones or in other hard members or in the ligaments; now cure it with a fistular treatment, as was said above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	On the treatment of boils and inflamed nails and the incision of fingers added and severed.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Panarici is an abscess that arises from under the nail of the thumb or toe, and often appears on other fingers as well; if it persists and its treatment is delayed, it becomes a chronic abscess or corrupts, leading to pus formation which can erode the base of the nail. It then spreads throughout, causing corruption, and through this corruption affects the bone, giving off an unpleasant odor, and the extremity of the finger turns crooked, with its color turning dark.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And therefore, when you have that condition we mentioned in the division and your treatment does not yield comfort, then you must incise with an iron all the excess that remains of the nail. Then cauterize the wound nearby, for a hot cautery is beneficial in this case.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	However, if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, but the edges of the nail already press into the flesh at certain points, causing it to pierce and injure the area, then you must place a thin splint under the angle of the nail that is piercing the flesh. Push that part up and incise the flesh easily there. Place caustic and corrosive medicines on what remains of the flesh until it is entirely removed; then treat that area with ointments until it heals.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	If the corruption has already entered into the bone, then you must cut into the bone and extract it, for it will never heal while the corrupted bone remains inside.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the corrosion and corruption have spread to the finger, then you must cut it at one of the joints, according to its potential for recovery, and then treat it until it heals.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	However, if there is an impact or friction on the nail, and subsequently severe pain in that area, then at the beginning you should perform bloodletting on the patient, and then dry the nail with a sharp spatula using a transverse section from top to bottom. Be careful that the cut does not penetrate into the flesh beneath the nail, for you will cause the patient severe pain and may lead to excessive growth of flesh around the area; then treat that area with something that relieves pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	However, the finger, which is common in many men, is largely fleshy throughout, partly bony, and partly nail.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some of them are located at the base of the joint, or their growth is in some of the finger joints.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	But he who is born with nodules on the said area does not suffer, and he who is born with strong joints there is less afflicted.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those that are fleshy, the incision is superficial, and it is such that you should incise them slightly at their base with a spatula.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	But when it arises from the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; therefore, guard against amputating it.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But in one who is born with deformities of the toes, you should incise the flesh at the beginning with a round incision near the bone, then cut it with one of those appropriate saws, and then care for the area so that it may heal.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	But when consolidation occurs in the toes due to frequent injuries or by nature at birth, or due to the consolidation of an injury or combustion from fire, or similar causes, then you must dry out that consolidation so that the toes return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	Then place between the bandages some wool soaked in rose oil so that they are not lightly consolidated, and separate them, or place between them a thin sheet of lead until it is consolidated as required.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	Similarly, if consolidation occurs in the fingers or the palm, then dry out that consolidation according to how it is prepared and suits the shape of the limb.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	From the inscription of veins, these are varicose veins. 
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Then it is necessary that you administer purgation of the body from black bile several times with strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The sectioning of him is according to this method: at the beginning, wash the thigh with warm water so that the thick blood may be dissolved, which is the dirtiest part of the thigh, and then bind the patient's thigh tightly from the highest part of the thigh down to near the knee with a bandage, and then dry the vein in one place, or two, or three places with a wide incision, and then raise the black blood with your strong hand from below the thigh up towards oneself, and above downwards, until the quantity of blood that you wish and is sufficient comes out, and which the patient's strength can endure.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then give it to him, and command him to abstain from foods that generate black bile.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And repeat the treatment by phlebotomy when the veins are full, and this should be noted by the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	The elevation of them is according to this method: you who shave the thigh of the patient, if it has thick hair, then put it in a bath and wash the thigh with warm water until it reddens and the veins are prominent; or that it be exercised by strong exercise, if a bath is not available, until the limb is warmed.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then dry the chain at the site of the vein by drying along its length or at the rear where you find the heel, or at the very bottom where you find the ankle.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then apply the chain with hooks and squeeze the vein from all sides until it becomes visible to the touch, and you should observe how that area turns declining towards blackness.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And then when you spread and from the chain you take that white thread which serves as a string. 
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then you place that under which it is elevated and laid out from the chain, and suspend that with an ounce of ointment.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then make another incision near that incision by about three fingers' width, and then enlarge the opening above the vein where it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then lift that area and incise it at the back section below the talus, and then extract it and lift it until it is detached by the second incision, and then remove it from the incision that is above it.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do this until you extract it from the incision that is the highest or uppermost of all the incisions, until everything is detached; and then incise that area.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you cannot extract and lift it, then insert a needle with a strong double thread and tie it and pull it out, or insert the probe there and rotate your hand in all directions until it is loosened.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And be careful that it is not cut; for if it is broken, it will be difficult for you to lift it out, and harm will come to the patient because of this damage.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And once everything has been completely removed, then apply to the wound site wool soaked in wine and anointed oil and unanointed oil, and care for it until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vein is contracted and has tortuosity in its coils, and it is not straight as we have said, then you must make incisions along all parts of its tortuosity and at the points where it coils, and then suspend it with hooks until you lift it entirely.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And be careful with your incision so that you do not cut into the vein and do not damage it, for it will be difficult for you to raise it up; and use caution in this matter.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Formation of the incident with which the vein is cauterized:
Forma de unci orp:	Forma de unci orp:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.
De extraccio venae cruris.	From the extraction of the vein from the leg.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the thighs in hot lands, such as in Al-Andalus in the land of Arabs and in the hot and dry lands of India with little moisture where there is no grass or tree.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And often it is generated in other parts of the body besides the thighs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And its formation is due to putrefaction that comes from the bowels, just as serpents, worms, lice, and other worms are generated between the bowels and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of susceptibility to the occurrence of this vein is that you will find violent inflammation in the thigh; then, the area becomes blistered; and soon the vein begins to emerge from the site of that blistering, which resembles a root of a plant.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then, when its end appears, you must wrap a piece of lead, weighing one dram, over it, and attach that and leave the lead hanging from the thigh.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And as many times as you bring forth any cause from the external parts, wrap that in lead and seal it.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the wound is prolonged, then you incise a part of it and wrap the remainder; and do not incise that which has been contracted within until it is brought out, for if you incise that which is contracted, it will retract into the flesh and cause an abscess and putrefaction in the area and a bad ulceration.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	For this reason, it must be treated carefully and extracted little by little until it is completely removed from the wound, so that no part of it remains in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein, it extends in some men to the length of five palms and ten, and I have even heard of one that was twenty palms long.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is incised during its treatment, then insert the probe into the tract and pierce through with the instrument along its length until all the material inside is evacuated, and apply putrefaction to the area for several days with medicines; then treat it according to the treatment of abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein sometimes has branches, especially when it approaches the joint of the foot or in the foot itself, and it comes out with multiple openings, and a branch extends from each opening.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And thus treat that as we have said in the division and with what has been said above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	About the section on worms generated under the skin and it is called bovine disease.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is called in some places the bovine disease because small white spots appear on the skin, and it is a worm that lives between the skin and the flesh, moving throughout the body up and down, and its movement can be felt from one member to another until it breaks through the skin and comes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its generation is due to the putrefaction of certain humors, just as worms, serpents, and earthworms and ascarids are generated in the stomach.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared because of its malice, for when it moves through the body and rises to the head, reaching the eye, it strongly affects it, enters, and destroys the eye, causing white spots to appear.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And thus when you wish to treat it and extract it, you do so only according to its movement and appearance as felt, and then you must tightly bind what is above it and below it with a ligature and strong constriction, and then dry it out and extract it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is embedded in the flesh and you do not find it, then place a heated cautery over the area where it remains, and the main fear is corruption of the site which corrupts the area as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	If you find that it has reached the area near the eye, then press strongly on the eyebrow with a tight grip, and then dry it out, and extract it; and it is necessary for the patient to cleanse their body using medicines that evacuate bad putrid humors, and they should avoid foods that generate putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	Regarding the treatment of nausea.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is called "nafir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes to some members, and then moves from one member to another.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And I have already seen that second thing which I am going to recount.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was called to a sick woman in a village, and after uncovering her arm, I saw a small swelling in the vein of her arm. After remaining for about an hour, I observed that swelling moving like molten lead rising up, but more lightly than it should be, as if it were quicksilver flowing from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then the pain moved to that area and settled into the muscle, and remained there for about an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then it moved to the other arm before reaching the other side of the body.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then it returned to me that it was moving throughout her body as I observed; and I was greatly amazed by the transformation and the speed from one member to another.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had seen this before in my other patients in the same manner; however, I have seen many cases where the pain is transferred from one limb to another.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But do not use this method with the eyes as in the case of a woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I did not think it to be anything other than that which causes the woman to be of old age, or rather of dried-up body and exposed veins, and in this condition she feels this altered windiness.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that this reverse cure not appear in those who are delicate and have a moist body with engorged veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you want to treat him and the patient feels that pain, then it is not clear to you by smell as we have said, then press on that area lightly and incise into where that compressed wind has risen, and cauterize the spot.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
De extraccio de sagetas.	From the extraction of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are diverse according to their types, and according to the parts of the body into which they fall, for their diversity is such that some have large points, and small ones, and concave ones, and blunt ones; and there are those with three prongs, and those with tongues; and there are barbed ones.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And that which depends on the members and parts into which they fall is in two ways: for the members are either principal organs, such as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar ones; and thus when it falls into one of these members and signs of death appear to you, which cause I will describe shortly, then you must avoid extracting the arrow from those in whom death is imminent if they are in the best condition, and when these bad signs do not appear to you, and the arrow is not hidden deep within the member, then you extract it and treat the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And the signs of injury to the brain are when an arrow pierces it and penetrates the bone, and exits through the skull which is above the brain, for from this occurs sudden fainting, blindness, dizziness, inflammation and burning in the eyes, inflammation and burning of the tongue, spasms, confusion of the mind, vomiting bile, speech suddenly becomes disjointed and the voice is destroyed, and there exits from the wound a white moisture resembling powder, and the appearance changes to paleness of the flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And therefore if these signs appear to you, then abstain from the treatment and the extraction of the arrow, unless it is necessary.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	And the signs of the arrow when it strikes the heart, so that it is near the left breast, and you feel that it is fixed in a hard place, not a soft one; and the movement of the arrow is similar to the pulse's movement, and black blood flows from the wound, and there is coldness in the extremities, and cold sweat, and fainting; therefore, know that death descends very suddenly.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the signs when the arrow has wounded the lung are spitting of frothy blood from the wound, and the vessels near the neck are inflamed, and the color of the patient changes, and they expire a great spirit, and they seek a draught of fresh air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow strikes the membrane that is in the feet, and the pain is near the lower ribs, and severe pain with intense distress and sighing occurs, and not all the muscles of the limbs are affected.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if you find an arrow in the stomach, then remove it from the wound along with any undigested food. 
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the arrow is shot into the belly, and it is embedded in him, make some incision of the wound, or the skin, or the intestine that is ruptured, and there is no hope for the extraction of the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow hits the bladder, and urine is expelled outward, and some process from it causes something to exit outwardly, and there is great pain on the patient, then you know that it is mortal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	And the other members as well, such as the face, neck, jaw, shoulders, and arms, and the vertebrae of the back, the collarbone, the thigh, the calf, and similar body parts, are saved according to the major dispositions when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery and is not a venomous arrow.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I will recount to you what I have observed about the nature of these arrows, so that you may understand this in relation to your treatment.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause is such that in one instance, an arrowhead was embedded in the lacrimal of the eye near the base of the nose, and I extracted it from the other side, leaving the earwax untouched, and he was healed without any harm to his eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I extracted another arrow from a Jew who had been struck in the gray area of his eye, leaving the eyelid intact. The arrow was already concealed, and only a small part of it could be reached to which I attached a handle, and it was a large sharp arrow of the Turks, with a lion-shaped head that had no fletching.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And it is beneficial for the patient, and not accidental in his health a bad incident.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man who had been shot in the throat, and it was an Arab arrow, one that has ears; and then I made an incision between two cartilages because it was submerged in his throat; and then I carefully maneuvered with that, and then I removed it, and thus healed the Christian.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And extract another arrow from a man who had been shot in his abdomen, and he thought he would die because of that; and then, after thirty days had passed and there was no change in any condition or disposition of his health, cut around the arrow and grapple with it, and he was healed, and no adverse incident occurred to him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw another man in whom an arrow had lodged in his back, and the wound had become fixed on him; and after it was nearly seven years, the arrow embedded itself at the root of his thigh.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman in whom an arrow had lodged in her abdomen, and the wound was firmly set inside her, and there was no change in her condition, and the woman did not suffer any harm in any of her natural functions.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And I saw another man in whom an arrow had lodged in his face, and the wound was firmly set, breaking off the arrow without experiencing much pain, and similar cases to this have been observed.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And I extracted the arrow from the man, who was one of the king's princes, with the arrow lodged in the middle of his nose, which had slightly shifted to the right side, and the entire arrow was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called for his treatment shortly after the arrow wound within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I found the wound of the arrow very narrow; and then I searched for it with a fine probe, but did not feel it; but he felt a pricking under his right ear, and then I suspected that this pricking was due to the tip of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I applied the area with a plaster that has attractive and digestive properties, believing that the area will become inflamed so that the location of the arrowhead becomes apparent, as it dries on top of it. 
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And do not apply anything in the significant spot where the arrow has hit; and continue with the poultice on it for several days without any incident; and during this time, the wound heals, and remove the patient from the extraction of it within several days before one day they feel the arrow inside their nose and report this to me.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then I place on the wound sharp and corrosive medicine for several days before opening it with fire, and with a probe I feel that area, and find the tip of the fine arrowhead which adheres to the shaft.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then I insert the acute medicine into the wound until I can visibly see the tip of the arrowhead, and I continue with this treatment for a period of time between four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And then when the wound has enlarged, and it became possible for me to insert the forceps into it, and remove that [foreign object], without causing any secretion, I did not cease to subtly work and ingeniously operate on that in various ways, until one day I succeeded in taking it out with forceps skillfully made, according to the form of which will be shown at the end of the chapter, until I extracted that; and then I restored that wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored, but I restored it and the wound was consolidated, and the patient was healed completely, without any cause for concern.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recommend to you the quality of extracting some arrows for which you should pause and consider the meaning behind what I have not said, because the parts of this art and the definitions of it are not understood through mere narration nor are they fully grasped by merely reading the book.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot;
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore I say that arrows are not ejected from the limbs in which they are embedded, but according to two ways: either by attraction of the place into which they enter; or by the opposite force from the other side.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is ejected by the place into which it entered is an arrow that has penetrated fleshly tissue and is thrust out and expelled.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if it does not obey the excretion at the time of urination, then you should leave it for several days until the flesh around it rots and the attraction is reduced, allowing its exit.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And similarly, if it is embedded in bone and does not obey the excretion, then leave it for several days and repeatedly apply attraction and motion each day, and it will be expelled.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if it does not obey the excretion after several days, then you must drill around the arrow embedded in the bone from all sides with a fine tool until the area around the arrow is widened, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrow is embedded in the bone of the head and has advanced into one of the brain's ventricles, and several of the symptoms that I mention appear in the patient, then avoid extracting the arrow and leave it until the patient's condition stabilizes over several days; for if the arrow reaches the spinal cord, death will not be long delayed.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is not inserted into anything but just into the body of the bone and does not pass through to the marrow, and the patient remains for several days without any accident befalling them from those causes, then you should consider the entry point of the arrow and the entry wound.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	If the arrow is already embedded in the body and it is not felt, then you should search for it by touch, and if you feel it, then pull it out using hooks that are appropriate for extraction.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot reach it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the shaft, and there are no bones, nerves, or veins in the way, then you should enlarge the wound so that it is possible to extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if there are ears (barbs) with which it is held, then you should cut the flesh in which it is embedded entirely around using all the skill you can muster; and devise a method, if you cannot achieve the removal of the flesh due to the entanglement of the barbs and their twisting, until you overcome them.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the arrow from any part where it is embedded, then use the strength of your hand with forceps in all directions until it obeys; and be careful with subtle skill so that the arrow does not break and to make the extraction as easy for you as possible.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot do it at that time, then leave it for several days until the parts around it can be examined, and then repeat the procedure when it is relieved.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	And if bleeding occurs contrary to expectations, then administer the treatments we have mentioned in the respective chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And be mindful of the source of the vein or nerve or cord injury, and administer any possible method to prevent the arrow's penetration; do this with ease, calmness, slowness, and firmness as I have recommended to you.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And therefore, bend the arrow so that it follows the figure according to which you should extract the arrow from the patient, as this is more beneficial.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	And if this is not possible for you, then administer whatever is possible according to the figures [methods or diagrams].
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	However, for arrows that have been embedded from the opposite side or if any part of it has already protruded outside, or if the tip of the arrow becomes slippery due to contact with the area above the visible chain and sticks out; then you should cut at that point; make the cut according to the amount that the forceps can grasp; then pull it out, as it is made easy to extract this way.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if it is retained in the bone, then you twist the blade according to the opposition so that the arrow presses into the bone, and widen it as you insert, and then extract it. 
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if not, leave that for several days, and then repeat that until it comes out.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the shaft of the arrow is in there, then you push it out with it.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	But if the shaft has fallen off and you want to apply force, then you insert it; if it is deaf (blocked), use a concave instrument so that it enters the cavity of the arrow's head and then push it out with it. 
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	And if the arrow is concave, then you should force it with a strong thrust into that area, for the wound is relieved by this action. 
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the arrow is embedded, then you must hollow out all the flesh in which the tip is, if it is possible for you to do so, and then treat that area with whatever is appropriate.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the arrow falls into the foot, or in the abdomen, or in the bladder, or in the side, and is close enough that you can touch it with your hand, and it is possible for you to cut around it, then cut around it and be careful not to injure a vein or nerve, extract it, and then treat the wound if necessary, and care for it until it is healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Method of using forceps with which arrows are removed:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Let the ends of them be like a bird's beak, which are made like a pincer to grasp the arrow so that they do not let it go.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And of those, various special sizes are made, large, small, and medium, according to the size of the arrow and its thinness, and the width of the wound, and the constraint of it.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	And in this way, so that the instrument within is alleviated in the concave groove and is pushed with it.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	From the phrase "De fleubotomia de las venas," we can infer that it refers to
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	Here is the translation of the provided text, line by line:
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	Here is the translation of the provided text line by line into English:
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot and thigh there are three veins; one of those is below the curvature where the wild leg bone bends; and the second is sophena, and its location is below the thigh bone of the domestic side; and the sciatic vein, and its location is below the thigh bone of the wild side; and in the thigh there are other veins similar to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The healing of veins near the ears is for cleansing ancient and foreign, scaly and ulcerous conditions of the old head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of bleeding those is according to what I recommend to you: it is that the head of the patient be shaved, and the head of the patient should be rubbed on the occiput in the area where both veins are with a wide cloth with good friction; then tighten the patient's neck with a band so that both [veins] and their locations appear near the ears in two places at the back of the head; and you seek those with your finger, and if you feel the pulse of those with your finger, it is a sign that they are found.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then you take the lancet, which is sharp, and then insert it into the vein until the bloodletting reaches the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	Then raise your hand with the vein and the bandage upwards, and incise the vein with a sharp incision.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And the length of the incision should be about two fingers joined together or around that; and let as much blood come out as you wish.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then press with pillows and leave it until it is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And it has already been mentioned at the beginning of the book about these and their cautery.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence, line by line:
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of performing a phlebotomy on them is according to what I recommend to you: have the patient extend their neck so that the two veins become visible and clearly manifest, and place your finger to feel their pulse; and then you can proceed with the attempt.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Then you lift the chain above the vein on the parts above with your index finger, and introduce the phlebotomy instrument gently underneath, lifting the vein up; and cut into it just as you have done in the other two veins; let blood flow according to the amount necessary for your requirement.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then release the constraint on the patient, and place your finger over the vein for an hour; then apply a cloth and poultice over it and tightly bind it with strong compression, and leave it until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And the recollection of them has already preceded, and their incision, and the attraction at the beginning of the book. 
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And thus the treatment of phlebotomy of the frontal vein is similar to the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein for old diseases of the face and migraine and inflammation and foul-smelling ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of the phlebotomy is as I recommend to you: so that the patient strains their head with a bandage until the vein appears; then take the instrument named the lancet, which has this form.
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Place the sharp point of the lancet at the head over that vein and strike it with force or by another means in the proper way, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you desire; then close the puncture wound of the patient and bind it until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And sometimes it is opened with a lateral incision, but the phlebotomy should not have an acute end like other lancets; rather, it should have a broad end, and cut across in this manner because the bone is very close and strong, and the sharp phlebotomist might break it.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	And for the treatment of the two veins that are near the tear ducts of both eyes due to eye disease caused by inflammation and pus in the eyes, and for illnesses of the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of phlebotomy is that the patient holds their own neck with a bandage, and then you perform bloodletting on them, and you stand above their head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And the phlebotomy is performed transversely along a little length with a small phlebotomizer, because there is no flesh in that area; and if the phlebotomizer is delicate, break off its tip slightly.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then let blood as much as is necessary for you, and place bandages over those areas, bind them tightly for one night, and then loosen them.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	And the venesection of the nasal vein is particularly beneficial for acute fever and violent heat, and for illnesses of the face, migraine, and swelling that occurs in the face, especially when it is chronic.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of the bloodletting is such that the patient holds their head and you then place your left hand on their nose, take a fine long bloodletting instrument and insert it in the middle part of the nasal tip precisely, because the vein does not appear to the touch here, and blood will start to flow immediately.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	You must gradually withdraw your hand with the small bloodletting instrument and let the blood flow according to your need; then bind it for one night, because it heals quickly.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	However, bloodletting from both arms is beneficial for alleviating air constriction and the onset of leprosy, as well as many other diseases, impetigo, and severe corrosive ulcers, such as herpes.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of the phlebotomy for them is that the patient should hold each one in their own arm with a bandage; and the practitioner should be above the head of the patient, and the patient should sit on a chair.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And then perform venesection on the vein with a small, wide lancet bit by bit; and then extract blood in a measured quantity or according to what you deem necessary for that case; and then do the same with the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then loosen the ligature and tie the two veins with a moderate tightness so that the patient is not choked, and leave it in place until the wound is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the treatment of venesection from the larger veins helps with small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums, bad ulcers and cracks, and bad ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of the venesection for this is that you make the patient sit in front of you, and tie a band around their neck, then spread open the lips and look at the two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the second on the left; the identification of each is by the darkness of each of both, and more so where small black veins are seen around them; then incise each with an appropriate incision.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	And if you have doubt and do not know which one it is, then make an incision on the larger of those, and from that, the pus will become evident.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make the appearance of the two veins that are on the lips above visible. 
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	But it is more customary to incise the two veins that are in the area below.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of flebotomizing them is that you follow the patient between your hands before the sun, and lift their tongue, and look at their tongue, from one side it has veins and from the other side it has veins, and the color of each declines to black.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then perform arteriotomy on each one; and be careful not to overextend your hand while performing the arteriotomy, for those are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the veins that are bled in the calf are those which customarily flow throughout all men, and their bleeding is done in two ways: either by applying a vein-opening device with something like myrtle or olive oil; or by cutting them with a lancet-like tool, and this is called alnessil, and this is its form:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this instrument is what you need for incision, and of those, use slender and fine ones according to the width of the veins and according to the tightness of them.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	It seems like the text you provided is a fragment and might be referring to a method or form of flebot
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	And use the same thin instruments as before, and you need to open the concave veins that are full and appear thick, and those that contain thick, clotted blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the method of olive veinlet bloodletting:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this bloodletting instrument is of lesser width and has a finer tip, and it is suitable for bloodletting from fine veins that contain thin, clear blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	But the benefit of bloodletting from the basilic vein, which is one of three veins, is that you extract blood from diseases located in the throat and neck, and from those affecting the feet and abdomen.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it is advisable for the bloodletter, when performing bloodletting on that vein, to be very careful and cautious, because an artery lies next to it. If they make a mistake and puncture incorrectly with the bloodletting instrument, they may cut into that artery, causing a flow of blood, so one must not use a sharp bloodletting instrument but rather a cutting instrument for this procedure.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilica does not appear through clear manifestation, then you must leave that one and move to another, or seek some other remedy; or perform a phlebotomy at the end of the arm, for it is evident; and treat that with a phlebotomy as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	If you wish to perform phlebotomy on the patient, then you must first feel along the arm until you locate the area where you know the pulse is located, and then mark that spot with your thumb; then tie up the arm and apply a concave incision to the vein using a lancet as we have said; and be careful not to hit the artery with your strike in any part of the location.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you see, as you tighten the bandage, swelling in the place where you have pressed with your finger, then that swelling is from the artery, and thus it follows that.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you see the blood flow during phlebotomy as clear as a child's urine, and the blood is fine red, then know that it is arterial blood; and then you wait and place your finger on that spot for a long time; and then remove your finger, and if the blood stops flowing several times when interrupted, then you strengthen the arm and leave it be.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And protect the patient from their own mucus, and keep them in a state of elevated warmth without moving them for several days until they are healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	But if the blood does not stop flowing and you find that no medicine is available for this condition, then you incise the artery, if it appears to you; for the extremity is contracted, and the blood stops flowing; or take a piece of fig bark, soak it in water, take one half, and apply it over the vein with tension using a bandage and padding until the next day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the blood stops flowing, that is good; and if not, then treat it with methods previously mentioned for stopping the flow of blood from such sites.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the removal of blood from him is difficult in many conditions due to the small space of the wound and the possibility of arm movement.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And it is necessary for the phlebotomist to be aware of that which is above in the phlebotomy of the patient, because that is a nerve; and then if one adjusts in the puncture of the phlebotomy and finds the nerve, it will cause stupor to the patient, and the healing is difficult for him, and often he is not fully healed. And this nerve sometimes appears to sensation; and if it is hidden from some people and is subtle and does not show itself, then you must place the phlebotomist with whom you perform phlebotomy using a piece of linen, and avoid the nerve with your skill.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then you cut the vein along its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The benefit of performing phlebotomy on the cephalic vein is that it draws blood from the head and helps with ailments of the eyes.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And it is proper in this case, if you want to perform phlebotomy, to use an olive-shaped or myrtle-shaped lancet; because it is the safest for all veins, as it does not hit arteries or nerves.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	However, it is essential when performing phlebotomy that you ensure you do not only puncture the tip of the vein with the lancet, and seek a lighter spot, and do not touch it unless it is discovered by the initial percussion which should be done a few times before phlebotomy.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, in some people, a hematoma may form when phlebotomy is not performed during the initial attempt. Do not touch that hematoma.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	However, the quality of the phlebotomy and its consequences must be considered in their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first line discusses the conditions under which phlebotomy (bloodletting) should be administered:
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And if phlebotomy is performed on the third day or at the first sign of pus, let three hours of the day have passed.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	More phlebotomy which is administered, more when it brings convenience and necessity for this, whether at night or during the day, at any hour and in any season.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And it is necessary that a boy not be circumcised until he has reached fourteen years of age, and a pregnant woman should not be circumcised except between the fourth month and the seventh, and old women should not be circumcised who have already passed sixty years.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And when someone wishes to undergo bloodletting by any method, it is necessary to cleanse their intestines before the bloodletting with a lion's cathartic, if there are retained fecal fragments in them, so that the veins do not carry excesses into the bloodletting of the pure intestines, and they do not harm the main limbs.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And patients should not undergo bloodletting if they are recently from sacred rites or excesses of drink, nor when coming out of illness or drunkenness until those things have been alleviated in them, nor suffering from dropsy. Moreover, bloodletting is especially feared near colic pain and vomiting, near the belly's swelling, and near multiplication of coitus and labor and exercise of fasting or vigils, and any cause that weakens the strength, whether physical or mental.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And also consider the thinning of humors before this if the blood is thick, through foods and drinks, and through medicines if that is possible for it.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And also enter into bathing if there is no cause prohibiting it, or exercise through some activity so that the blood may be thinned.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And perform phlebotomy (bloodletting) on him in the morning around the hour of terce (approximately 9 AM), as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And take care that the patient is protected on that day from all evil accidents of the mind, such as anxiety, anger, fear, and from all bodily strains, such as excessive labor, hardship, sorrow, and similar things.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And in his treatment, let there be present the causes that are customary for people to use with aromatics and odors, as well as balms and similar things according to the extent of possibility. 
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the phlebotomist onto a cushion that is higher than the cushion of the one who is to be bloodlet.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And then pull out their arm, and the phlebotomist should rub that area with his hand two or three times; then tighten the ligature with a strap and wrap it around twice.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And let the binding be moderate, for when the binding is not equal, or if the binding is due to an excess, then prohibit the flow of blood; or use softening, and then prevent the escape of blood from the body.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And before the binding, it is necessary that the person to be bled should rub their hands together until the veins are swollen and clearly visible.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And then the phlebotomist should anoint their lancet properly with a little of old oil; and then place their index finger of the left hand on that vein, at the spot where they wish to perform the bloodletting, so that the vein rises slightly, and the pulsation is felt clearly as which of the veins you find taut like a string should be used for phlebotomy, and those that are full of air will contract when the lancet is placed on them should not be used for phlebotomy; and if the lancet does not puncture the vein easily, then that vein is narrow.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And therefore, it is necessary that the phlebotomist be firm and diligent in all these matters.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And then remove the flebotomi [likely referring to a bloodletting tool], but if the vein was cut in one attempt, that is good; and if not, you repeat this another time after leaving that spot for a while, or over it with a compress, if the area is not inflamed.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the area is inflamed, or the patient shows fear, then you leave it for one or two days, and do not tighten the bandage, for fear that it will draw inflammation to itself, nor should they enter into a bath.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And then repeat the bloodletting if necessary.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the incision is small and blood flows subtly, and you fear that not enough blood will come out, then you repeat the bloodletting in that area slightly more aggressively and adjust the incision a bit, and do this with a compress before the area becomes inflamed, for in many cases, inflammation can occur with a small incision.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	But if that area is already inflamed, then do not repeat the procedure there, for it will not help you in any way; and apply some part of an ointment over it, for it will alleviate the body's need for blood.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better in this place to use oil and the other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And similarly administer a mixture of oil in every phlebotomy with which you cut the veins to prevent the flow of blood from the body, and use theriac, aloes, and sage when one of those is placed on the area, for the blood is refined and coagulates when it is thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if in the place of the phlebotomy a large abscess is generated, which often happens, and especially to those who have not been bled except on that occasion or near the poor vein, then you apply, and place over the area a sponge soaked in water and salt, slightly warmed, and keep that there for an hour, as it dissolves.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And it is necessary to do this near the exit of the blood from that vein with an adequate amount or from another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if some blackening or greenish color remains in the area for several days, do not worry about it; and if you wish, apply over that area some solution of aloes and myrrh dissolved, or some solution of mint juice or calamint or similar to it.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And often abscesses and swellings result from bloodletting at the basilic vein.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And therefore place your hand on it, and if you then find softness with your compression on that area, then that swelling is bad; and then be careful to apply over it some of the solutions we have mentioned, as it will strongly draw blood from the artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And make a poultice with something that is astringent, so the area may be hardened, and then treat it with another cure until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And it is necessary to withdraw blood from every person according to the amount of their strength and according to the dominant color over the blood as it appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	For if the blood is black, then you let it flow until it becomes red; and similarly, if you find it thick, then you let it flow until it becomes thin; and similarly, if it is sharp, until the sharpness of it is removed.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And it is necessary for those who are full and strong and have a need for blood extraction in one session that the incision of the vein be enlarged and the bloodletting be abundant.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And for those who are weak, the opposite should be done, and it is necessary to extract blood in multiple sessions, and the flow should be small.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best practice in vein bloodletting is that the incision should be transverse, not a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this method of phlebotomy is safe from blood flow and nerve injury, and it is more praiseworthy and safer than phlebotomy according to latitude and longitude. 
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And in cases where fainting is customary to occur before bloodletting, you must treat that condition before the bloodletting with a bit of bread infused in pomegranate juice or simple hippocras warmed; and extract a certain amount of blood in three or four portions.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if it is chilled due to complexity, then take before bloodletting an infusion in myrrh syrup or in aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and the like, or in an aromatic and fragrant syrup.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if you encounter fainting due to improper bloodletting, which is caused by the loss of much blood, then it is necessary to drink water and an aromatic subtle syrup; and use aromatics with alguailea, and anoint their feet with that.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division in the chapter on fainting due to evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And for those who wish to dilate their veins and dissolve their blood a second time, it is necessary for the one for whom bloodletting is a significant evacuation, and its property is gradual, so that it evacuates the blood little by little, according to the strength of its effect over several continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	But for those who wish to dilate their veins and draw their blood a second time, and whose body is strong, then this should be done about seven or nine hours after the first bloodletting.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	And if one wants to draw blood from a part of the body that is inclined downwards, it must be done on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And when you want to release the arm and evacuate blood for a second time, since the vein's orifices are already closed and it has become difficult for the blood to flow out, that you press on it with force and slightly extend the bent part, for this is too harmful.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	They perform the operation by letting blood according to proper method; or they stop this with the sharpness of the bleeding instrument which clots the blood in the opening of the vein; or place on that tyriaca alfarach, or sage, and compress that with a slight pressure until the blood has been fully let out.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is inflamed, then leave that one and do not touch it until the inflammation has subsided.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if the necessity provokes you to let blood properly, and there is no excuse, then bleed that person at that site or in the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called the "sinew of the arm" is bled at the site of the fossa or basilic vein, when those are not found or are hidden, because it is composed of those veins.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of the bloodletting is that the patient should immerse their hand in warm water until the skin becomes reddened and the vein appears clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	Then bind it tightly with a bandage with moderate tension; then perform the bloodletting transversely, not longitudinally or latitudinally.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And let the incision be wide and let your phlebotomy, with which you bleed that area above the joint of the hand a little.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if you need to stop the flow of blood, then soak your hand in warm water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve what is necessary.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	If you were in the days of summer, then you are excused from the repetition of placing the hand in warm water, and instead the body is immersed in warm water during winter. 
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than that of all other veins, because it does not have pulsating veins or nerves.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the phlebotomy of the vein of the right hand is relevant to diseases of the liver.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of the phlebotomy on him is that you stretch your hand with a ligature or with your hand, after you have placed it in hot water, until the vein becomes swollen and well visible to the eye; then perform the phlebotomy transversely; and if you cut through entirely, do not cause any harm in this way.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And be careful not to end the procedure with phlebotomy, because it leaves the nerves of the fingers exposed and without flesh. 
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And then wash the hand in warm water and let the blood flow into it, for if you do not wash that hand in warm water, the blood will clot at the opening of the vein, and this is prohibited from flowing.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when the blood is drawn according to the necessary quantity, then you should place salt and oil over the vein so that it does not clot quickly; and similarly, you must do this in all straight vessels.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	The benefit of performing bloodletting from the left hand is that it is beneficial for illnesses of the head.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And similarly in the bloodletting of the thigh, do as you have done in the other [area].
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the benefit of bloodletting from the vein known as the saphenous vein is for illnesses that affect the lower part of the body, such as disorders of the uterus, retention of menses, and diseases of the rheumatic and ulcerative conditions of the thighs and legs, and similar kinds of illnesses.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of the bloodletting is such that the patient should immerse their foot in warm water and rub it until the veins become visible; then tie a bandage around the ankle; and at the site where the vein becomes clearly apparent, you should place your finger, from which several branches spread out across the surface of the foot.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And therefore perform a wide incision or place the patient's chest upwards from their heel and away from the swelling, whichever is better and more beneficial.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you perform a venesection on the surface of the foot, then be careful of the nerves that are located there on the surface of the foot, and apply your venesection in such a way that you do it crosswise, as if you were going to cut through it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And let the venesection be silent (or gentle). 
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	And if bleeding is prohibited; then you should soak the foot in warm water and let the blood run off so that it may be evacuated. 
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the phlebotomist makes a mistake in the first attempt, then repeat with phlebotomy slightly further on because the area is slippery; and do not fear malevolence, but rather protect yourself from the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And similarly, apply sulfur to the other foot in the same way.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And regarding the sciatic vein, the location is as we have said, place the ankle below the wild marjoram partition. 
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the treatment for hip pain due to blood corruption is phlebotomy.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient enter into a bath, and he should stretch and tighten his thigh on the side of the groin above the ankle with a long thin bandage, for it only appears by this method.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And thus when it appears, then you perform flebotomy on that according to each skill that is possible for you and according to the transverse, which is better; or incise that by incision or cut that by section, for the location of it is suitable.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is in many men somewhat enlarged; and if you find that, and it does not appear to the senses as a whole, then puncture some branch of it, which appears on the back of the foot instead of the area near the little toe and the ring finger.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And be careful of the nerves, and let as much blood flow as you wish.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Then release the constriction and place over the area of the phlebotomy a clean and strong dressing, because it is quickly healed.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Regarding ventosation and the qualities of using them.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Bubbles are of corns, or of chaff, or of vein.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And bloodletting is performed in two ways: one of them is by scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is bloodletting without scarification.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this bloodletting that is without scarification is done in two ways, either with fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the bloodletting sites that are administered by scarification and extraction of blood are fourteen places on the body, among which one place where bloodletting is performed is alnocrati, which is the back part of the head; and another site is on both sides of the neck equally; and bloodletting from the chin below the mandible, below the mouth; and bloodletting from both armpits; and bloodletting from alohoster, which is above the end of the spine; and bloodletting from two flanks, which are from both arms; and bloodletting from both calves; and bloodletting from both thighs.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And bloodletting does not extract blood from the small scattered veins in the flesh, and by this you do not lose the strength through them, just as it happens with phlebotomy; nor should bloodletting be performed with fire or without fire in any disease caused by excess until the whole body is purged.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	And if the necessity arises for ventilation due to illness or habitually, administer this at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, in the middle of the month, and at any time.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	Here is the line-by-line translation of the provided text:
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore when you encounter any of those causes, and specifically if it is in the third or a bit later into the month, then I command that ventilation be performed more than two or three hours after daybreak.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And the treatment for vertigo caused by pressure on the neck is that when you apply gravity to the head and cause it to sink into the pillows; however, this should be done close to the evacuation of the entire body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this cupping is in the location of the cephalic vein incision.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not good for someone of a cold complexion to use it, or in whom there is catarrh, because it brings great harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And by this, there is no need for the use of those old remedies, and in which heads such fresh illnesses occur.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	And to that person who is continuously over it, forgetfulness is induced; and because of this, you must command the cupper (or bloodletter) to briefly pause his hand at the spot of the cupping, to prevent the generation of forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	And for the venesection of the saphenous vein and basilic vein: by this you can address asthma, and the constriction of airways, and the splitting of the storm of air (likely meaning respiratory distress), and cough, and congestion.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And it is necessary that the suction cup be slightly heated with alcohol, for if it is placed directly, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the application of cupping to the back helps with headaches and ophthalmia, and migraines, and suffocation, and pain in the roots of the teeth; and it is used instead of bloodletting from the basilica vein.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And you must command the cupper not to press his hand too hard during scarification so that he does not penetrate the artery and cause a flow of blood.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And cupping under the chin helps with alcoholism in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similar conditions in the mouth; it is used instead of bloodletting from the veins that are near the two lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	And cupping that is applied to the two temples helps with cephalalgia (headache), which is caused by an excess of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And cupping applied to the two divisions inside the temples provides the benefit of bloodletting from three veins, which are the basilica, fusca, and cephalica veins, because it draws blood from all those smaller veins that are in the flesh and from the smaller veins of the other larger veins until the attraction reaches the three main veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the surgeon that he not proceed too much in scarification, for the area is bare of flesh, and leave its nerves and arteries untouched.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is a cupping treatment with which one cups over the thighs and applies to the hemorrhoids of the anus and to the pus-filled ulcers.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And it is necessary to command the leech to make a large leeching, and that it be of ash [herb], for the area requires strong drying; and forcefully apply subtle leechings and let it be scarified with scarification.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	More wind in the upper regions can manifest subtly, for it draws blood from throughout the body and exacerbates old pains of the thighs and womb, and of the bladder; and they provoke menstruation and alleviate bothor and ademil; and they stand in place of phlebotomy of two sophenas, and alahorcoben, and of two cavilhas.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, fever weakens the entire body and causes fainting in many people.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And regarding the application of cupping, it is commonly applied to the back and chest areas using two cups.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the placement of the cups is that you place the cup at the beginning, apply suction gently and promptly, and do not prolong the placement of the cups. Instead, place them lightly, remove them courteously, so that the humors come to the surface appropriately.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not stop repeating this process and continue until you see the area become red and swollen, and the coagulation of blood appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then you should perform scarification and gradually repeat the suction. Then, take into account the condition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	For that person who has tender flesh and few pores, you should scarify them once and not more, so that the area does not become ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And instruct the cupper to deepen the scarification slightly and increase it a bit, and perform the suction with ease.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if there is thickening in the blood, then it must be that you scrape twice, for in the first scraping the path to subtlety of the blood and its moisture is opened.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	But in the second examination obtained from the extraction of thick blood. 
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the blood is very foul, then a third scarification should be performed so that the last of it can be drained.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And finally, when we want to extract blood slowly or in small amounts, a single scarification is sufficient for us.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we perform multiple scarifications; and if we know that the blood is thick, then we must perform more intense scarifications.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term "scarification" refers only to the depth of the cut.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the vein is thick, hard, dark, and its pores are narrow, it is necessary that the areas for cupping be anointed more gently, opened up, and resolved; in summer, use oils such as aloes oil, violet oil, or double almond oil, or colt's foot oil; and in winter, use narcissus oil, lily oil, chamomile oil, or blood oil, and similar ones.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the excess is thick and cold, then the oil should be marjoram oil, balsamite oil, aloes oil, anise oil, or similar oils.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	If the area to be cupped has wide pores and tender flesh, then it is necessary to avoid oil, and it is required that at this point, the areas for the cups near the cupping should be washed with cold water or with fresh well water, or with water from a spring, or with rainwater, and similar things for those.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And for those whose blood has a lot of moisture, wash the cupping marks with sour wine, or with water mixed with myrtle and sumac, and similar things for those.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And for those whose excesses are thick, wash the cupping marks with old wine, or with water mixed with thyme, which is marjoram, or from the decoction of dill, or chamomile, and similar things for those.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And it is necessary to protect the cupping before bathing; usually, it should be administered just before the bath by one or two hours, and it is required that the person sleeps near the cupping site.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is meant is that bloodletting should be regulated before cupping.
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	Consider at the beginning: if the person who needs to be bled or is undergoing flebotomy (bloodletting) is choleric with sharp and inflamed blood, then cooling remedies must be taken, such as sour pomegranates, bitter endive, vinegar, lettuce, sage, and julep, and similar items. 
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And pause their food as if with porridges, and serve them bird meats, and seasoned foods with herbs, and similar items.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And for those whose condition is exacerbated by cold, it is necessary that they drink almond syrup or aniseed syrup made from seeds, and sumac, and red wine mixed half-and-half with white; and it should be recommended to them to use moderation in drinking and eating, and to avoid foods like pork, hempseed, radishes, small birds, and pigeons.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And it is necessary that on the day of bloodletting and flebotomy, the amount of drink should be greater than food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And it is necessary that in certain hours, some people be given to drink theriaca alpharac, or medicines of musk, such as mastic, or acetit before bloodletting or before flebotomy or afterwards, so that the main limbs are comforted and the blood is made subtle; and they should not take those heated substances.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	However, the bloodlettings that are performed by scarification should be done on areas such as the liver, and over gout and podagra, and around the navel, at the sites of the joints, and on the axilla, because these parts cannot withstand scarification on them.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not desired for those but the attraction of blood from the member, just as placing a suction cup on the breast in the illness of blood flow from the nose; and they use that so frozen and viscous air may be dissolved from the member, just as placing [a suction cup] over the belly and the navel; for that rarefies the member, warms it, and removes pain when dissolving the air.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is already placed on the lungs when dealing with their obstruction or phlegm, for by virtue of strong attraction it draws out the obstruction and eliminates the phlegm from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And similarly, it acts when placed on the liver and spleen to remove air that is trapped in those organs.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these suction cups are applied only with suction; and at times they are applied with heat.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And at times they are applied filled with warm water in the illnesses of the spleen.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And this is done so that the suction cup may be filled and become larger, whether it is just warm water or water in which suitable herbs are boiled.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of cupping administered with fire: the diameter of the opening should be two fingers, according to how we have formed it; and the amount of air inside should be half a palm; and it should be placed on his side, in the area that is along the circuit, halfway around, the hole should be small enough so that an needle can enter into it.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	It should be made of soft wood or citrus, with thick edges, smooth, and clean so that it does not move the limb from its position on it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And in the middle of it should be a transverse bar of wood or iron, where a candle with fire is placed.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this cupping should be larger than the one we have described; and it should be smaller for those according to their illnesses and the condition of the person using it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the cupping for children and those who are weakened is different from the cupping for young people and those with larger bodies.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of placing this cupping with fire on the limb is to extend the cloth with fire from proper wood in front of a small candle of wax, and place that in the middle of the transverse bar at the center of the cupping, so that the fire is lit around it without burning the patient's body.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And then it is placed on the limb of the patient, and the finger is placed on the spot we have mentioned, so that when we have the cupping glasses and do not want to hold the finger and let the vapor rise over that spot, then the cupping glass will dissolve quickly.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And then heat the mixture according to its method, and repeat that if you need to do so.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	Use a cupping glass that is applied in the illness of pleurisy, with water, in which there should be no crossbar or handle, and it is not applied unless it is filled with water, and it is placed only on the affected limb.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is its form: The larger the cupping glass, the better, because it can hold a greater amount of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter XC VII.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Bloodletting is not administered on many parts of the body but only in those areas where cupping cannot be applied due to their small size, such as the toes and gums and similar areas; or in parts that are devoid of flesh, such as the fingers and nose and their equivalents.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of the leeches that you have found should be used if they are from clean stagnant waters.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And then they should be left day and night in stagnant water until they become hungry, and ensure that no residue remains in their bodies; then the body should be purged at the beginning with bloodletting and cupping; then rub the patient's limb until it reddens; then place them [the leeches] on it.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are filled and poured. 
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to suck out the area with a cupping device, it is more beneficial for healing.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, then wash the area with vinegar and then with clean water; and let it be rubbed and squeezed.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the flow of blood continues near the application of leeches, and this sweating occurs, then soak a cloth in cold water, and place it over the area until the sweating subsides.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the bleeding increases, then sprinkle powdered vitriol or gallnuts and similar astringent substances over it until the bleeding stops; or place the pods of cooked broad beans on the area and leave them until the beans adhere to the spot, and the bleeding ceases.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And it is necessary, if repeated applications of leeches are needed, to change them when possible.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if the application of leeches is prohibited due to suspension, then rub the area with fresh blood or insert a needle into the spots until blood flows; and then apply them, for they will adhere quickly once they sense any blood. 
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to vomit, sprinkle a little bit of powdered aloes, or salt, or ash on them, and they will vomit soon.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Here is the translation of the provided line:
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine; it is the restoration of fractures and dislocations in the bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	O, son, know that those who boast about this chapter are foolish doctors and common ones, and those who at some time did not regard the books of the Ancients nor read a letter from them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason, it is made that this method of the knowledgeable in our land is kept private; and I have not forgotten this at any time whatsoever; and I have not applied what follows without a lengthy reading of the books of the Ancients and study on understanding those, among which I extracted the knowledge of those.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And then direct yourself to experimentation and study throughout the length of your life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described in this chapter all that my knowledge contains and on which my experience has passed; since I have summarized this for you others and freed it from lengthiness; and summarized this at the end of summarizing; and shown this at the end of explanation; and formed several forms of the treatments that are administered, as is done by adding an explanation, just as I have done in the two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summary and collections concerning bone fractures, from which a preliminary introduction is necessary before we begin the recollection of fractured limbs and the various aspects of each one.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Therefore, in the prelude of this chapter, we should speak of the summaries of the discourse; and the chapters must be understood by which, at the beginning, the practitioners are forced to stand on the truth of those things; so it is for you and those who are quick to know or learn this noble art other than yourselves.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And thus it is said that when you encounter a fracture or dislocation or twisting or sprain, then at the beginning you must attend with bloodletting or setting that area, or both together, unless some cause prohibits it, such as weakness of strength, or if it happens to a child, or an old person in decrepitude, or during times of intense heat, or of intense cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	Then be content with food such as fresh herbs and meats of birds and crabs; we prohibit heavy meats and filling yourself with foods and any food that fills the veins with blood, except when you are sure of a safe abscess cautery, and if you do not fear an effusion of matter in the limb.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to their original regimen with which they were accustomed.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And thus as the broken bone begins to heal, then the patient must be fed nutritious foods that are rich and heavy with viscosity, such as foods made from cooked wheat with water, rice, beans, fish, cow's stomachs, eggs, fresh cheese, thick wine, and similar items. With this regimen, fracture healing coagulates more easily and better.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And know that bones break when they are in men who are in their prime and in the elderly; it is not possible for them to be continued and consolidated according to their nature due to the dryness of their members.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are solidified and continued according to their nature all the time due to the drying of those members, and thus continue and strengthen those that belong to them at the end of the softness, just as the bones of small children do.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	But nonetheless nature adjusts and you should bind over the broken bone of any part with something similar to glue, in which there is thickness that adheres and strengthens what is within as they are conglutinated and bound together, until strength and firmness come, just as fire at the beginning, until nothing prevents it from performing its functions.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason, it is necessary to stop the patient's food, food which has heaviness and viscosity and thickness, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Note the diversity of fractures according to the diversity of the limb.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And know that the types of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the limbs, for a fracture of the thigh bone is different from a fracture of the skull bone; and a fracture of the foot bone is different from a fracture of the spine; and similarly, all other limbs are different from one another.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I will proceed with the recollection of each type of fracture, explained in its own chapter separately from the other.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Note the diversity of fractures within the fracture itself.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the various types of bone fractures are distinguished in their specifics; for there is an arched fracture which occurs in the ribs; and sometimes a longitudinal fracture of the bone is made: and these are the fractures of the spine, ribs, and projecting and non-projecting fragments, just as it is done when a reed is prepared to write with, and there is a fracture with a wound and disruption in the head, and there is also a small fissure.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And for each type there is a particular remedy or torment in the restoration, which will be recalled distinctly in its respective places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Sign of a bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And by this, a bone fracture is recognized: it is the twisting of it, and the prominence and perception of it to the touch, and its sound when you press it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And thus, when there is no apparent twisting in its place and no sound is made by your touch when you move the bone and the patient does not find great pain, then there is no fracture here.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	Sometimes there may be twisting or a small fissure, in which case you should not manipulate it with your hand and through compression; sometimes apply some medicines of which memory comes to mind at that moment suitable for the area; and then bind it tightly with a subtle bandage.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And know that when the area is bent but not split into two or any other way that does not affect its utility, as long as the entire part is contorted, then you should begin with your treatment to correct it sometimes by applying a poultice.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if a poultice is applied to it, then leave it for several days until the swelling subsides; and then treat it in whatever way you can with care and ingenuity.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And know that the restoration and healing of the flesh is quicker than that of the bone where the injury occurs.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And then strengthen that second part so that the memory of it returns.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	But if the injury is in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken limb from both ends, whether it is an arm or a leg; or with your hand if the limb is small; or with two ropes or one rope and your hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And you should position the limb in such a way that you place it according to its natural shape, while the broken parts are being stretched, so that you can skillfully return those adductions and in whichever manner you can back to their proper places.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And be careful according to your strength that you do not cause pain or injury to the patient through your operation; and do your best to align one bone with its companion in the best possible forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And it is necessary that at that moment you skillfully touch it with your hand, and if there is any different cause here, correct it and adjust it according to the extent of your ability.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And excessive stretching and compression are harmful, just as some foolish doctors do who often cause inflammation by their cautery operation or cause contraction in the limb as we have seen from their many operations.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And then you should proceed with equal care and a proper operation and constriction of that limb, and rest and tranquility; warn the patient about this and ensure that he avoids any movement of that limb during his waking hours and sleep, and watch over its turning and agitation, and prevent all of his movements with all of his strength; and wait until the position of the limb is one in which pain is assured, the cause of which is when it is placed in a position where there is pain or injury; then change it to another position where he does not feel pain; and ensure that its position is straight and level so that no distortion occurs to the limb when it is restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the constriction of the tranquilized limb is what I recommend; so that you know that broken limbs vary in their smallness and greatness and in the form of those. 
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And of those that are small like the arm and the thigh and the calf and similar to these, it is necessary that the wrapping be of very fine cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	And for those that are large like the thigh or the abdomen, it is necessary to wrap them with a tight and strong bandage, because the side binding connects the large and strong limb entirely with an equal tightening, in such a way that no impurity enters.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And then begin, for your evacuation of the dislocation, to apply a suitable bandage over the area of that fracture with three or four layers depending on the limb’s needs; and hold your hand slightly over the bandage.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then come with that person to the highest part of the fracture site, and strengthen it so that your binding does not loosen where you have tightened the area of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And then extend the area around the fracture site slightly, and gradually loosen the binding little by little until you have freed a large part of the area.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And then take another bandage and wrap it again over the broken area with a winding pattern, and proceed to the part farthest from the fracture; and let your operation be in binding the winding and loosening it as we have said for the first wrapping above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then place between the layers of linen or cloth, with which the complexity of the fracture is accommodated, if there is any complexity in it; and if not, do not place anything there for any reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then place another bandage over it, and adjust properly made splints on these wrappings immediately, if there is no inflammation or abscess in the area, and if there is an abscess or swelling, place something over it that reduces the abscess and decreases the swelling; leave that for several days; and then tighten the splints over it.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And let the plasters be half a cane in length and well shaped wisely; or let them be of pine wood; or of palm branches; and let the width of each plaster be according to this form and this figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, the splint that is placed over that fracture should be slightly thicker and wider than the other splints, and the length of the splint according to what fits the limb in size; then tighten over the splints with another bandage as per your initial binding; then remove it above with wax properly as we have said about binding, which means that your binding should be tighter at the location of the fracture, and the farther away from the fracture, the looser the binding.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And it is necessary that the threads be medium in thickness and fineness, and they should be made of linen; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the operation by some foolish surgeons who use ropes instead of proper thread, it is a great mistake, for then the binding comes off unevenly.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And also, very fine threads are not suitable, because you will not achieve the binding you desire with those, and there should be at least a finger's width between each splint.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is troubled by the ends of the splints near the binding in sensitive areas, then place soft wool or padded cloth between them so that it does not cause injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	At times a fracture is accompanied by inflammation, and there occurs disruption in the chain, which will be remembered in that chapter under singularity.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And you should know that not every broken limb is set with splints on the first day; the reason for this is that when the limb is large, it does not need to be placed on the splints until about five days or seven days later, according to your assurance of the occurrence of inflammation and abscess.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the method of the plasters with which the Ancients would treat fractures, dislocations, and sprains.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Method of making a plaster for the restoration of fractures, suitable for various complications and especially for women and children, as it does not generate heat or cold: take flour powder, which is the residue of wheat that adheres to the mill's walls during grinding.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And prepare it thus: sieve it with egg white, and make the mixture neither too thick nor too thin; then use it accordingly.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method of plaster for restoring fractures, dislocations, and sprains: take assafetida, ladanum, acacia, enula, and migrach (which is the resin of wild millet), each one dram. x; myrrh and aloeswood, each one dram. v; alochil, two drams xx; all should be crushed, sieved, and mixed with alichi water or egg white if the patient’s condition is inflamed; then use this plaster, which is of good composition and easily restores broken bones, and confers benefits to many people.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All shall be ground in a mortar with fine powder, and shall be sieved, and shall be mixed with water or with egg white and shall be administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Method for treating joints and bones separated from their places, as well as pain occurring in them and at fractures: take fresh wool and soak it in sweet wine and cooked oil, then place it over the area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	But in this plaster there is no virtue of restoration, it burns and expels pain properly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method for a plaster that restores broken bones: take leaves of wild fig and leaves of wild poppy; grind them all together and make a plaster out of them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Method for a compact plaster administered for the restoration of bone fractures and when you want to resolve the remaining swelling: take roots of elder, chamomile, and flowers of violets, flour of bran, all in equal parts; grind them all and mix them with wine, if the limb is not inflamed.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	But if it is inflamed, then soothe it with coriander water or with water and oil mixed together.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method for a plaster that is more effective in resolution than the first one, when you encounter hard swelling and want to restore the limb: take roots of elder and seeds thereof, as well as pomegranate rind, sweet clover, marjoram, violet flowers, and chamomile flowers, all in equal parts; grind them all together and mix them with sage water or sweet water or wine, according to the nature of the limb and the condition of its color.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	But Hippocrates does not say in his book that you should place something over the broken limb for its restoration, but rather a salve made of wax and oil and nothing else; and he recommends that it be balanced between thickness and thinness.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	More in Gaul it is seen that they place upon the broken limb those things for its restoration and the causes where there is drying with little heat such as myrrh, incense, and similar to those causes which we have recounted.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Method of plaster that comforts injury and pain: take wheat, cypress, human hair cut up or bird's down, elder, and salt, in equal parts; they are to be ground and sieved and mixed together, and a plaster is made.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	Here is the translation of the provided text:
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if you encounter a place with intense pain or swelling, then cool or unbind that area immediately, and remove the plaster from it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take linen cloth and damp sea sponge, and submerge that in warm water, and with that wash the area until the swelling ceases and the pain is soothed; then let the limb rest for an hour; then place upon it fresh wool submerged in sweet wine and oil or ointment, and bind over it for one night until you are sure of a secure abscess, and that the inflammation of the limb has subsided, and the pain from it is alleviated.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then apply that subtle binding and small plaster without tightening it with your initial constriction, and use it gently until it is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if you find that the abscess and the hardness and the pain and the swelling and all the symptoms have been completely alleviated, and there is no longer a need for plaster and binding, then you should repeat the process as you did at the beginning in the same manner.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if you do not encounter any of those causes in the limb that we have mentioned, then do not unbind it until three or four or five or seven days later; and sometimes this is left for twenty days according to how it appears to you regarding the unbinding of the limb, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and approaches the coagulation of the flesh over it.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And now adjust more on the constriction than on your first tightness entirely, and adjust in the swelling of the food of the patient, according to which is preceded by the memory of it.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	If you see the place of the fracture already dry and exhausted more than it should be, then know that nourishment is prohibited from reaching there; therefore, foment that area with lukewarm water constantly while you dress it; and let this continue for all three days; and slightly loosen the binding, so that through this operation nutrition can reach the limb, and it will heal lightly.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	However, what those unskilled restorers do when they fail to properly realign a fractured limb at the beginning and instead restore it in a twisted manner is an error according to their operation, causing great fear; if this were correct, the Ancients would have expanded on this in their books and acted accordingly.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen any of them do this, which is why it is more reasonable to assume that it should not be done.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter second: On fracture when it occurs in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The types of fractures are many, and their forms are diverse, and the causes are distinct. Some fractures are caused by the impact of a club, which strikes all the bone within the skull, leaving no bone behind, just as it does to a tree trunk; thus this type is named ascial. Or the club incises some part of the bone, cutting into the flesh but not penetrating entirely through the backside of it; and this type of fracture is called levatio absoluta.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the severity of these two fractures is either great or slight, and it is due to a fracture that is crushed or scraped; and the cause of it is a blow with a stick or falling on stone, and their symptoms are similar.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture either penetrates close to the periosteum which is under the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone, and the severity of these two fractures can be great or slight.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And for a fracture that occurs in the bone, in the fine hair-like detail, and because of this, this type of fracture is called capillary.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And it is a fracture that is caused either by falling or by the impact of a stone and similar objects, which causes some slivers of the bone to enter into the internal parts, and it occurs in a concave area much like when you hit the edges of clay pots with an impact and pieces break off and go inside.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And this is more often done in bodies with moist bones, such as infants' heads.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And thus to all these types of fractures and wounds, they are pieces like separate stars. 
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And I will come back to all of this in its proper place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And know all these types of fractures by detection on them and by inquiry into their attempts and the corruption of flesh that is over them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And a capillary fracture is known by what is discovered on the bone, and it is cleaned, and lint is applied to it with cloth, for the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	In the treatment of fractures, consider at the beginning the symptoms of the patient, and if you see from the symptoms that they indicate by clear manifestation of fear, such as vomiting due to anger, stretching, loss of understanding, loss of voice, fainting, acute fever, discharge from the bowels and burning of them, and similarities of these symptoms in the most severe conditions, then it is not curable.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you see unusual symptoms, you hope for recovery, then you begin the treatment of the patient.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The cause is that if the injured person comes to you at the beginning when they are injured and this happens in the winter days, then you must study the condition of the bone before the fourteenth day according to all circumstances.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is during the summer days, then you must remove the bone before the seventh day, fearing that what remains under the bone may be corrupted by pus, and that accidents which we have recounted might occur.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the membrane covering the brain, and is in small fragmented and rough pieces, then you must incise the fragmented and roughened part, as I will recommend to you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And it is that you shave the head of the afflicted patient, and expose the bone according to your custom and method as much as possible based on the shape of the affliction, and that it be light over the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if you happen to expose the bone, blood flow, or an abscess during cautery, then you should stop and proceed with what is necessary, which is to fill the area with cloths soaked in wine and oiled rose, and allow the wound to rest until the abscess is calmed, and ensure there is no further bleeding; then begin circling around the bone and performing the excision.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this should be done according to one of two methods of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And one method is that you incise the bone with a straight cutting instrument, and this is its form: And then administer another incising tool like this, a bit wider than the previous one; and this is its form:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then administer more of the incision to the side than the second.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And it is necessary that you have various types of incisors, some wider than others; and some are shorter than the others and are sharp at the ends of their extremities, and they should be made of Indian iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them easily in percussion over the incisions so that the head does not become confused and lead it away.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and hard, then you must perforate around it before administering the incisors with the drills, which are called non-deepening drills.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are not named thus unless those do not stop the end of the bone of the testicle at what is near it, so that on the tumor there is a round extremity or margin over which the sharp end is left similar to a margin or a small circle, which you must prevent from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take many of these probes, each of which should be suited to the sharpness of each bone, among them there should be one present for all parts of the skull, the end of which should be sharp, the length and brevity of which should be according to the sharpness of this part.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the form of three types of probes: The quality of piercing around the broken bone is to place the probe on the bone and rotate it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then change the probe to another location, placing it so that the distance between each puncture equals the thickness of the rib or about that much.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then cut with the incisor between each fracture of the bone, making as fine a cut as you can at the end where it is delicate, as we have said, until you remove the bone, either by hand or with some other tool that you will have prepared for this purpose, such as tweezers and fine forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And you must be cautious that the incisor does not touch any part of the spine.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And therefore when you have circumscribed the perforated bone, and it will be separate from the chip if it continues with it, and you will extract that, then rasp and equalize that on its roughness in comparison to what is in the bone using another instrument similar to a chisel, but moreover, this must be more tenon-like and finer than other chisels.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if any small and fragmented parts of the bones remain, then take those out easily with what you should use from instruments; then treat the wound with lint and ointments which we have mentioned.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And another method of operation is gentle and far from pain, which you call Gaulia and heal by great heat; this is the word on it: at the beginning, you must start to reveal the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most violent and most apparent. Before doing so, when you have uncovered that part, place the extremity of this smooth and pleasant instrument, whose form is as follows:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And it is that the lens-shaped fracture is lion-like and does not cut into any cause, and the acute fracture divides it in two parts in front along its length, just as you see; so the lens-shaped fracture should be aligned with the spine with its sharp edge facing towards the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then strike on the incision of one part with a small hammer so that you cut through the entire bone with ease as it is turned, and be sure about the periosteum so that no accident happens in any way, and even if the medic was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant among them; certainly, and even if he were asleep.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	When any remaining piece attached to the bone of the abdominal wall in certain areas of the bone is found, cut it away from there using the pointed end of a lens-shaped instrument, and remove it easily from there, for it can be removed without harm or fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the subcutaneous tissue, and what is severed or remaining from the bone is its surface, and roughness and subtle splinters remain within it, then you must scrape away that roughness and root out those splinters with fine razors which you have prepared in different quantities so that you can apply them in the most appropriate places for their use and the correct one of them according to where you refine your operation on that broken bone and its shape.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And you must administer with your reason at the beginning using the blunter side of those razors, and then use the sharper side of them, and do not cease doing this continuously until you reach administering the sharpest and most subtle of all those.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	And in each of the other small capillary and subtle fractures, you must administer care according to what you aim to correct with it.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is important to note that not everyone who has studied this art is equally skilled or reliable in its practice.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And we have demonstrated this on large fractures as well.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the panniculus is pulled when you remove the bone, then it is necessary that you take cloth according to the size of the wound, and submerge that in oiled rose oil, and place that over the opening of the wound; then take another piece of folded or tripled cloth and submerge it in wine and oiled rose oil, and place that over the first cloth, doing so as lightly as you can on top of it, without pressing too hard to avoid injuring the flesh; then apply a linden leaf poultice over that, and do not tighten it beyond the extent necessary for the size of the wound.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And leave it with this treatment for one or two days until you are certain of the abatement of inflammation; then remove it and apply medicines that provide excessive dryness, such as linseed poultices and flour of iris, and powders of ashes and myrtle bark, and similar substances.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And it is that you should make these medicines into a powder that will be sprinkled over the wound when they are dry; generally, apply to it any medicine whose property is to cleanse and not irritate.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And beware according to your skill that the wound in your treatment is clean; and let there be no deafness of ointment or other substances; nor allow virulence to accumulate within it; for when applied over the panniculus of the brain, it corrupts that area and weakens it, leading you to cause a malicious evil upon the patient.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And strike in the fontanel of the head, for it is modified by the bone and especially when its care is neglected, and there is blackness on its surface; therefore consider if such accidents happen to the patient as we have said, know that it is harmful to all health.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if no blackening occurs except from the medicine that is placed on it, and this blackening is due to the power of that medicine, then you must take one part of honey and three parts of anointed oil, and with those mix a cloth, and then place that over the wound; and then treat that with the healing spices as needed until it heals.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	For the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that the nose is not broken in two separate parts at once unless they are the uppermost ones, or one of those higher portions, because there are two bones there, as the part between them is cartilaginous, and it does not break easily; you only encounter friction, twisting, and bending.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	If one of the two parts of the nose is broken, then you must insert your little finger into the patient's nose and use your index finger to realign that fracture from inside, while using your thumb from outside, until the nose returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And this should be done easily by you, and be careful not to cause further pain to the patient through your procedure.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the uppermost part of the nose, and your finger cannot reach it, then it must be aligned using the tip of a probe that has a small thickness.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then you should treat it similarly.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And attend to the restoration of it on the first day of the fracture if possible; and if not, then around the seventh or tenth day, you should cauterize the swelling.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And then insert into the end of the nose a wick of linen cloth if the fracture is in one part, or place two splints if the fracture is in two parts, and let the thickness of the splint be such that it fills the hollow of the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And some of the ancient restorers say that the splints should be inserted into leather and changed throughout the day, but I do not see this as necessary; instead, it is better that the wick be soaked in egg white mixed with powdered meal; then leave the splint inside until the bone is fixed and the cartilage has hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And sometimes a pen made of wax wrapped in linen cloth is inserted into the nose instead of a splint; this is used when the nasal fracture is particularly severe and to ensure that the patient's breathing is not obstructed.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this method is not necessarily required; if you wish, do this, and if you prefer, use splints.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if swelling occurs again, apply heat; plaster the nose with wax or fat mixed with sweet wine and rose oil, or use diachylon.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	If you do not cause an abscess with the cautery, then it is necessary to cover that area externally with barley flour and the powder of crushed violets mixed with egg white; then place a lion's foot over it, and do not unbind the nose for any reason.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	If the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or comminuted, then you must incise over them and extract them using appropriate instruments; and then close the incision, and treat it with what promotes healing and consolidation, and with plasters suitable for that purpose.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if there is an inflammation inside the nose, then you must treat it with poultices and administer lead tubes until it is entirely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter IV.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the restoration of the jaw when it is fractured.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not inflamed, then check if the fracture is only external, and not split into two parts or bent inward; in such a case, the treatment is relatively easy.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, you should insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth; and similarly, if the fracture is on the left jaw, then insert the right index finger; and with that finger, push the displaced part of the fracture inward easily to align the pieces outward, using your other hand on the outer part of the bone; in this way, you properly realign it.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, then you must administer extension from both sides according to straightness until it is possible to align it.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if you encounter the displacement of teeth due to disruption, then secure those that you hope will remain with a gold or silver wire or thread; and then place wax on the broken jaw, and then place a doubled cloth over it, and place a properly made large splint or a piece of leather equal in length to the jaw over the cloth; and then bind it according to how your bandaging is prepared for application until it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to use rest and tranquility, and place their food in sipped broth. 
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you suspect that the figure has been altered in some way, then you should be careful and remove it on the third day; then correct what has already been altered of it and apply a plaster made with ground mallow, egg white, or flour of cumin, once you have removed the cerate from it, and place wool over the plaster.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then when that plaster is placed and adjusted properly on it, and the position of the bone is not altered, leave it like that, do not loosen it until it is healed and the fracture has strengthened; for usually this kind of fracture heals in about three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if an abscess should occur again, then administer what we have said before during the treatment until it is healed, and let that abscess be drained.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is accompanied by a wound, then consider whether it is a fragment of bone that is separated or splinters; you must carefully remove those splinters with what is appropriate for such removal from the wound.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the opening of the wound is narrow, then you should enlarge it with trephination according to the extent of your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And then when you have removed those splinters, and no pus remains to be drained, sew up the wound if it is large; and if not, apply one of the plasters suitable for this purpose over it and promote healing until it is healed.
Capitol .v.	The given line appears to be indicating the
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	For the restoration of the collarbone when it is fractured.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	When the collarbone is fractured in front of the muscle, that fracture can occur in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	For it is either broken, separated, or separated into two parts without affecting the joints; and its restoration is easy. Or it is such that it affects the joints, making its restoration difficult. Or it is such that the fracture is accompanied by a plate (or plaque).
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the procedure for that, when the fracture is accompanied by a plate, is that you should have two assistants present, so that one holds the support and follows the broken collarbone, and the other extends the neck to that part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	Then align the fracture with your hands in such a way that it takes the proper form, ensuring there are no small elevations or concavities.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if more extension is needed, then you must place a small pillow under the patient's neck made of cloth or wool, and its size should be according to your need; extend and elevate the collarbone and compress the pillow with your hand until you properly align the fracture.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot pull the end of the fork to the parts outside because it has reached the joint, then the patient must be laid on their back, and a cushion larger in size should be placed over the muscle.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the minister presses the muscle of the patient in the areas between which the clavicle bone is elevated, which is above it, and then you correct the fracture and align it with the ties mentioned.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	And if you feel thorns of the fork bone and they are painful, now it is necessary to cut into that area and remove those thorns with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is retained in the bone, then you must make an incision with one of the incisors which you have prepared for this, since you have placed the forked instrument that serves as a lever on top; and this lever is made of wood or iron, and its shape is as follows:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it is similar to a spoon, of which this is the concavity; and its width should be according to what you need from it, according to the size or smallness of the bone.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	And let the length of it be as much as is possible for you during the operation; that it have two ends just like wings, and one end be wide and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the wound that you have incised when you have extracted the splinter from the bone is wide and there is a risk of abscess formation, then you should approximate the two edges of the wound with sutures.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is small, or you fear abscess formation, then you should fill the wound with cloths and poultices according to the extent of the裂伤。请注意，最后一部分“scissura de la plagua”似乎在原始文本中被截断了，我将其翻译为“伤口的裂伤”。如果可以提供完整的原文，我可以给出更准确的翻译。
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if an abscess forms, then soak a cloth in vinegar and rose oil and wine, and place it over it.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	And when the bone is stiff due to its wound and section, you should place a plaster made of ground wheat flour with egg white on it, then place lion's foot over it, and if needed, place titillike (a type of herb) over that. Then take a poultice, which is like the roll that the Saracens have, which should be long in length and about one palm wide; then place a doubled poultice over the lion's foot and plaster. Next, take a thin board strip with a width of three fingers and similar length; wrap that in cloth, and wrap that cloth with the board strip on top of the fracture site. Then apply poultices as if they are rolled up, wrapping them around the neck and titillike part of it and the patient's corresponding area, and reduce that over all parts. When you need to tightly bind the fracture, do so gently, which is not hidden from you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And so, the bandage should not be too tight over the broken bone; and therefore you must see the patient every day, so that when the binding becomes loose or you see that the splint is no longer well-fitted, then you correct this and strengthen the binding.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	Then place the patient's arm under their neck, and put a small cushion under the armpit so that when they sleep at night, the arm is raised on one side, thus lifting the shoulder joint; or bind the arm to their neck in such a way that it elevates the clavicle fracture above the muscle.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not loosen the binding unless suppuration or an abscess occurs at the site within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	Then renew the plaster if you have seen that its surface has come to this state, adjust it to the constriction, and restore it so that the clavicle fracture may heal and coalesce.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and healed according to the method in twenty-eight days, though sometimes in some individuals it may heal in less time.
Capitol .vi.	Capitol .vi.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	For the restoration of a shoulder fracture.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	A spatula is broken in the left side of it and not severed from it but only at the edges. 
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And therefore when the place of him — and it is broken in the middle part of him — and it is not known except by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture force it into its position and reduce it according to its natural form in every way that you can manage with your ingenuity.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And then place on the area powdered mallow with egg white and lion's styptic; then place a layer of doubled cloth; then apply over it strips of fine linen according to the quantity of the entire or a little more than a spoon.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	But if the strip is concave in some parts of the area, then fill that concavity with lion's styptic, and then raise the strip according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then secure it with a long bandage wrapped appropriately and bind the strip firmly so that it does not move from its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And examine the bandage every day; and whenever it becomes loosened, bind it again and tighten it, and realign the strip if it has moved from its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And lay the patient on his side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the spatula is restored in twenty days or in twenty-five.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And so when this number is completed, then you dissolve the binding, and you must know for certain which of those are bones whose beginning is not feared nor their dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed from the site of the bone splinter and place the chain there, then you cut over it, remove it, and do as we have said in the fracture of the clavicle: cauterize if an abscess occurs here.
Capitol .vii.	Capitol .vii.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	For the restoration of the fracture of the foot.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot is sometimes broken in the middle and heals slowly; however, the ends of it move and become displaced and fragmented.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And among the consequences when the middle of it is broken, it often tilts inward and causes great pain, difficulty in walking, coughing, severe fever, and vomiting blood; and it is evident in the cavity of the broken bone and not hidden to the senses.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of it is that the patient should be laid on their back, and a cushion should be placed between their shoulders; then press the muscles, and align the sides with both hands, being delicate in the operation and adjustment in every way possible to ensure that the bone returns to its proper shape.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	Then place a plaster and lint over it, and cover that with a thin cloth bandage of flax or linen or something similar in lightness, as you wrap it in cloth; then be careful to bind that over the broken bone so that it is not damaged; and wind with binding according to the roundness of the back at times, and secure that with a proper tightness; then consider the bandage continuously, and when it loosens, tighten it.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if necessity prompts the removal of that which causes corrosion or pricking, or pain, or an abscess that might occur at the site, then you cut and remove that and eradicate the poultice and correct what has happened through this manner of treatment; and then reapply the poultice, if it is necessary to do so; and secure it tightly until it is healed.
Capitol .viii.	The line "Capitul .viii.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	For the restoration of ribs when they are fractured.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Know that fractures of the ribs do not occur in thick places along the back, but at the ends where they join in front; and injuries to those areas only happen because they are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And the knowledge of it is not hidden from the senses; you should investigate it with the fingers.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration should be such that you align the fracture with your fingers in the most possible way, until it is properly aligned as needed, and then plaster and strengthen the broken bone with a splint, if that is necessary.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the ribs is declining towards the inner parts, then the patient will experience intense pain and puncturing sensations, much like the piercing that occurs in pleurisy, because the bone affects the lining; and it leads to difficulty breathing, coughing, and vomiting blood; and this condition is difficult to cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And the ants are generated in that place by various kinds of decaying matter.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And concerning this, it is said: one must restrict the diet of the patient that causes inflammation and flatulence, so that the belly does not swell and expand, pushing the fracture outward toward the skin.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	And let us beware of this so that it does not lightly cause the generation of an abscess by cautery, if it should happen; and if it has already happened, then it aids in dealing with it.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And some of them said that a cupping vessel should be placed on it and then suctioned strongly; this seems logical, but nevertheless, there is concern that the cupping vessel may draw the excesses to the location due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And some of them said: the area should be covered with wool that has already been soaked in hot oil, and pillows should be placed between the ribs until it is filled, so that the wrapping is like when you envelop that second roundness; then the patient should be treated with a diet and medicine for pneumonia.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if a severe constriction causes the patient intense suffering, and the bone pierces the membrane with a puncture, we are concerned for the patient; therefore, it is necessary to incise over the area, expose the broken rib, and then place an instrument over it that holds the spine in place, the memory of which precedes, so that we may cut the bone easily and extract it.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And then we should sew the two edges of the wound together if it is large, and treat it with plasters until it is healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if you find an abscess inside, then you cut and press pillows soaked in oiled cloth over the area, and treat the patient with what is appropriate for an internal abscess.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And let him lie on his side on which he sleeps until he is healed.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the restoration of fractures of the spine and neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Sometimes fractures occur in the bones of the neck, and at other times in their articulations, and similarly to the vertebrae of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then consider, for if their hands are already softened, stunned, and lifeless, and cannot move them nor extend nor grasp with them, and when you press them with your fingers or pierce them with a needle and they feel no pain in them, then you know that they will not be healed, and in the course of these conditions, it is mortal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if you move them and feel constriction when pressing with your fingers or piercing them, then you know that the bone's neck is saved and that the patient can be cured with treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if the vertebrae of the neck show similar symptoms and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then examine their feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	When you see that they are already softened, apply to them what is applied to the muscles, and then when he lies on his back, there is a windiness and an involuntary discharge, and sometimes he rolls onto his back and wants to urinate but cannot, now you know it is mortal, and then do not labor in the cure of him.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	But if none of those causes occur, the cause is better and lighter.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the treatment is to perform sedation of the abscess by placing it over the affected or irritated vertebra, or with crushed eggshells; place that several times a day until the abscess is sedated.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And then apply one of the comforting and stimulating plasters, and firmly secure it with a bandage; and command the patient to rest and remain calm and not to sleep on the part where they find pain until they are healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if you happen to detach the friction of the bone or for some reason it is already separated from it, then you must dry out the wound and remove that bone; then bring together the two edges of the wound, with sutures if it is large; then treat it with some flesh-growing ointment until it is healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	And if the rear part of the bone in the buttocks, which is the end of the femur, is broken, then you must insert the thumb of your left hand into the buttock and align the broken bone as much as possible with the other hand using manual manipulation; then apply a plaster and splint if needed, and secure it firmly.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel that the bones are broken within it, then you should incise over that area, remove the broken pieces, and treat the wound with the previously mentioned treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	The text "Capitul .x
De restauracio de la ancha.	Here is the translation of the given line:
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the upper thigh are broken, and if they break, then their fracture is not just a simple communication at the ends but rather extends longitudinally and inclines inward; and pain and puncture occur to the patient in that area, and the hip becomes stunned when fractured.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over that area which is above the fracture, which is the shape of it.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is only at the extremity of it (the limb), then you align that according to what is appropriate for setting, so that it resembles its natural form. 
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And so when you have prepared that, place an ointment on it, and then place a splint of wood or linen over it, and bind tightly with a bandage where you do not fear a puncture wound or the displacement of the splint.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And fill the cavity with something that fits inside so that it takes on the constriction according to equality, and command the patient to sleep either on their back or on their side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	And if an abscess occurs, then you should stop the extension of it and its restoration until the abscess is calmed. Place something over it to calm it as was previously mentioned; then return to restoring it, and strengthen it as needed.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if the bones are shattered or broken, then you should treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	On the restoration of the fracture of the auxiliary [bone or limb].
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The auxiliary is that which is between the knee and the top of the shoulder. 
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, then the restoration of it can be done in one of two ways, one of which is that you take a flat piece of wood of medium thickness according to this form:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And let there be two ligaments at the two ends, and then let it be suspended from an elevated place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And place the patient on a sheet; then extend their broken arm onto the wood until it reaches the tip of it at the midpoint where the curvature of the wood is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And then suspend something heavy over that, or the servant should extend that to the ends of it; and then the doctor should hold the fracture with their hands until the fracture heals properly.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other method is that the patient should lie on their back and suspend the arm of the collar with ligaments; then command two servants, one of whom holds what is above the fracture with their hands, and the other holds the part below it; each extends to their respective end.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then you tighten over the fracture with a bandage and over that with another bandage, and each of the two assistants extends from their respective sides.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And therefore, if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, then it is necessary to place half of the ligament over the tendon and the other part leave below the fracture by the knee.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And similarly, if the fracture is near the knee, then it must be that a bandage is placed on that area and over that knee.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Apply that with ease and do your work, and then when it is properly adjusted as needed and applied correctly, strengthen that area if an abscess does not occur.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	But if an abscess does occur, then release the binding by the seventh day, and place on it wool soaked in vinegar and rose oil until the abscess heals, and then strengthen that area.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the method to strengthen that area is to place a plaster over the fracture, and then put a wrapping of clean cloth over the plaster; and then adjust the arm on that support, and place your open hand over their muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And place the cloth and strengthen over the support the arm so that the arm is in a stable position, unless any cause from the broken bone prohibits this.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And now use splints.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And it is that you place over the fracture a splint that is more offset and stronger than the other splints; and place between each splint the width of a finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the break with an addition of three fingers on all sides.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then tighten over the splints with the binding that I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And it is that your binding over the site of the fracture should be tighter.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the fracture is more extended, the binding should be looser.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And thus you change the position of the splints and the binding as we have said at the time when you restore the limb to its proper position.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear an abscess may form, then you loosen the binding and the splints until the seventh day as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And then examine the limb in all parts for three days so that no puncture or inflammation occurs at the site; it is also prohibited to allow food to reach the limb due to the excess of binding; and thus correct everything according to what we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	And if you are in confidence that there is no cause for this, then do not remove the bandage until three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the patient's head be positioned on their back, and their hands placed on their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place over the splint a pad full of wool evenly, and ensure at all times, whether night or day, that the shape of the broken limb is not loose or dissolved, or that the bandage is loosened; therefore, correct this entirely with your skill.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And give food to the patient according to the order we mentioned before, such that the food is light at the beginning while strength is being built up; and then it is necessary to make the food more substantial for them.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	For it is customary that the splint and the bandage are kept tight for forty days; and after this period, they should be loosened, and a bath should be administered and treated with ointments that correct those issues.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is severe and grinding, then you should not remove the bandage and the splints until forty days or up to two months.
Capitol .xii.	The line "Capitul .xii.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	On the restoration of a fracture of the arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the radius and ulna; of which one is smaller, and it is the one that forms the wrist, and the other is larger and lies beneath the smaller one, towards the lower part.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And often, only the larger ulna is broken, or the smaller one, and often both are broken together.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the smaller ulna is broken above, then the restoration of it is easy, and its healing is also easier.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the larger bone is broken below, the fracture is severe, and its healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And worse than that is when both bones are broken together.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the broken bone is the smaller ulna above, then it is appropriate for the doctor, in restoring it, to apply slight extension with ease until it is aligned.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	And if it is the large vein that is cut, then it is necessary to apply a stronger extension [or: more forceful pressure].
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both flax seeds are crushed together, then you must apply more force in the grinding. 
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And you must position the shape of your hand during the restoration and extension of it over a cushion, and place the wrist of the hand at the upper parts, higher than all other fingers, and the little finger should be lower than the others, and the patient should sit on a lowered chair.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And place a cushion in front of him at his height or straight ahead, so that the patient does not struggle.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	Then the minister extends the arm from the lower part with his hand or with bandages, and another minister extends it similarly above.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	Then the doctor should realign the bone as he returns it to the best possible position.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if there is concern about the fracture of the bone, then you must carefully reduce every piece to its proper place with your skill.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if there appears to be a separate concern that the joint is dislocated and there is no hope for the restoration of it, then you should act on it and treat it according to the method we have mentioned above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	But if the fracture is accompanied by inflammation, I have already devoted a separate chapter to this, and thus you should follow the treatment outlined there.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you should line a cloth with wax made from rubbed oil and white beeswax, which is midway between thick and thin, and place a strong cloth over it with a fine bandage until the abscess yields; then remove the wax and apply a plaster prepared with ground powder and egg white, and then bind it; and let the bandage that is placed over the fracture be wider and stronger.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And you should know that the number of bones in the arm is seen in major dispositions, or rather a fracture in one part or two parts together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	Then place your bandage tightly over the site of the fracture more strongly and forcefully, and when the bandage reaches the parts above the fracture or the lower parts of it, place the bandage a bit looser according to how the memory of it is recalled at the beginning of the chapter. 
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moist, and not hard nor rough, and the thread with which it is bound should be of a proper balance between fine and thick, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the limb and its joint for several days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if any cause occurs for which correction is necessary, such as when an injury happens to the limb, and then it is required that you soak the limb in warm water until that swelling ceases.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And leave the limb unstrained until it rests, and then return the binding.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the binding is already softened and the bone is properly realigned and resembles its original state, then correct everything with your skill.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider if the nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb due to excessive binding, for then it is necessary to slightly loosen it and leave it that way for several days until the nourishment can flow to it, and then tighten it again.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	But if the patient does not suffer from any of those causes we have mentioned, then it is not necessary to untie it until about twenty days or thereabouts.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And then let the patient's limb be suspended and allowed to move slightly, and make the patient sleep on their back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or in thirty-two days, or it is often restored in twenty-eight days, and all of this depends on the condition of the complexions and the conditions of the virtue.
Capitol .xiii.	Capitol .xiii.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	For the restoration of fractures in the wrist and fingers.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Know that the wrist and the joints of the fingers often suffer fractures, and do not assume that they only occur sporadically due to minor impacts.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when the hand is fractured or broken, then it is necessary for the patient to lie down and in front of him place a support according to equality, and then place his hand on that extended support.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	Then the minister extends the broken bones, and the doctor aligns those that fit together with proper alignment.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And then it is necessary to apply a plaster and bandage, unless there is an abscess, in which case cauterize; then place a splint on top according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped that in linen cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	If the fracture is within the parts inside the palm of the hand, then make a ball-like shape out of cloth, and instruct the patient to hold that with their fractured palm; then bind it tightly with long cloth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And let the star-shaped cloth be placed under them, in which it is lifted, so that the body is applied to the palm; and hold it tightly as needed.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	And if the fracture is at the outer parts, then you must place a splint on top and another splint under the broken part in the palm, so that the hand is open and straight; and then apply the bandage, just as the hand is turned towards the wrist between the fingers with ligaments.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if you encounter a fracture in one of the phalanges of the fingers, then it should be aligned properly and then strengthened with the palm. If you wish, place a small straight splint on it to elevate the fracture and prevent it from sinking inward.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	If the fracture is in other fingers, such as in that of the middle finger, or in the index, or in the thumb, or in the ring finger, then it should be bandaged and tied with the finger next to it; or all can be tied together according to continuity, which is better; or place a small splint on it, just as we have said for the foot.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your treatment, and also that of the disposition of hot abscesses and their opposites—through your operation—with what is needed when any cause of these occurs, according to the repeated narration of it.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter XIV.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	On the treatment of fractures of the thigh bone.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bone of the thigh is often fractured and is noticeable to the sense, as it causes the part to turn outward and results in the most severe swelling.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the treatment of it is done in such a way that the bandage is tightened over the fracture and another bandage is placed below the fracture, and the patient is laid on their stomach and face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And then the minister (likely referring to a medical practitioner) extends the entire limb to its natural position according to its nature, when the fracture is in the middle part of the bone. 
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	Here is the translation line by line:
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And similarly, if the fracture is near the jaw, then the bandage should be applied close to the jaw, and the extension should be made towards the parts below it.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	Then the doctor equalizes the bone with both of his hands so that it is reduced according to its natural form and the bone is joined by a good union; then it is necessary to apply a plaster and binding, unless swelling occurs in the limb.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	But if swelling does occur, then you should leave it for several days until the swelling has subsided, and then return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The binding should be done as follows: you must wrap a hard bandage around the fracture, fold it two or three times, and remove any excess; then wrap the limb until you reach the ankle and the root of the thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert a long strip of cloth between the thigh and the limb near the jaw towards the parts below, so that the ends of the strip come out from the higher part of the two sides, and then wrap what is excess of the bandage around the limb and the thigh.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And then place over the thigh in the location of that fracture some splints, and put one splint on the bone of the leg.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill the spaces between the chest and the thighs with soft cloths, so that the constriction is eased.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then begin with a strong bandage wrapping around the middle of the fracture site with three or four layers, and as you move away from the fracture site with the bandaging, make your wrapping looser and lighter and softer.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And then extend the two ends of the splint to the areas between until you reach the ankle of the foot, and secure both ends of the straps from the other side so that the bandage does not move from its position.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then apply the bandage in such a way that it does not cause any corrosion, boil, swelling, or similar issues to the limb; and if any of these conditions occur, immediately loosen the bandage, and correct whatever issue has arisen as soon as possible, according to what we have said multiple times.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a piece of bone that protrudes in the fracture, then you should smooth it out as much as possible; and if not, cover it and remove it, and treat it with methods that promote healing until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And sometimes this thigh fracture is treated by aligning it with splints, just as we have said in the helper and in the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	However, in the restoration of him in such a manner, do not cause the patient to limp; and if it is restored alone, other than applying the other thigh to it, it is necessary that he limps who is always affected.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And you should know that the recovery of the thigh takes about forty days, a little more or less, and all of this depends on the diversity of the constitutions and other conditions.
Capitol .xv.	Capitol .xv.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	For the restoration of the fracture of the kneecap.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Know that a fracture of the kneecap can sometimes heal on its own, but it often results in frequent atrophy.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	Here is the translation of the provided line:
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of it is such that what is broken in its parts should be aligned with those within which it should be added and joined as much as possible by equalization, facilitation, and construction.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And then apply a plaster and place it on that round spot, if you need to do so; and secure it with a bandage suitable for this purpose.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And then consider all the procedures that we have recommended in other fractures, such as applying a hot poultice and similar treatments to address any accidents with what is appropriate until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On the restoration of a fracture in the thigh.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Know that in the thigh there are two bones, one of which is thick and is named for the thigh itself; the other is slender and is called the fibula.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And it happens to some types of fractures that what happens to the two bones of the arm also occurs, and thus the restoration of it is done in the same way as the restoration of the arm, and the operation for it is the same.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if both bones are broken together, the thigh is displaced in all directions.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the bone is fractured more subtly, the chest is turned toward the parts in front. 
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the thickest bone is broken, you will find that out, and it is one of those causes that are not within your control.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And then administer extension, equalization, and ligature of the splints according to that alignment.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, if the leg fracture is slight with small fragments, the extension should be less and lighter, and alleviate it with your strength.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the leg, there is sometimes a reason for an operation on the arm, and it is when you align the splints and complete your entire procedure. At that time, you will take pieces of pine wood which are placed under the causes that are positioned on supports, and they are made essentially from palm branches; choose those that have small thickness, and not too thick ones, and the length of those should be according to the length of the leg, and from the knee towards the foot.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	Then wrap each one with cloth in two layers according to its length, and place one layer over the part of the leg on one side and the other on the other side, starting from the knee towards the bottom of the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	Then bind the two splints at three points of both ends and in the middle point, for with this structure, the leg is prevented from tilting to the right or left side, and stands in good position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And already a piece of wood according to the length of the chest has been administered; and it is placed on the patient's chest to prevent any movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And it is especially important that you do this in the case of a fracture, and when it is properly treated in that manner.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then every day, examine the chest and study it with the knowledge gained from previous studies, and you will protect it from abscesses, inflammation, or other similar causes; and if any of those causes occur, then apply what is necessary to treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	On the fracture of the ankle and the bones of the foot and toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	A complete fracture does not often occur in the ankle; however, fractures do sometimes occur in the bones of the foot; and fractures rarely occur in the toes, and they only happen in times of predisposition or due to attrition.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if a fracture occurs in the bones of the foot and those bones are often elevated above their natural position, then the patient should place their foot on the prepared ground as described.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	And then place a hand over what is elevated of those bones, and then press on them, and push them back into their proper places in the area.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And then apply a plaster and bandage over it, and place a small table under the foot with two padded ends.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And then secure that with the foot using a proper structure, since you have wrapped that with cloths and other materials as needed.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And after three or four days have passed, then you unbind the bandage, for you will find the bones realigned, whether they were broken or dislocated, and the operation on them is thus as you know.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if some fingers are broken, then restore them, and align them as I have taught you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And then place a splint on the broken finger according to the length of the finger, and position it slightly to one side; then place under the foot the table that I have recommended to you, and secure it with an appropriate binding.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	And if what is cut from the bones is two or three or more, then you place on each finger a bandage of its quantity wrapped in linen cloth, and tighten the board at the lowest part of the foot, and stand on one end of the board and pierce the belly of the foot so that it has good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is important for you not to forget that you should not consider all the causes which have been mentioned to you in other fractures and accidents we have discussed; and prepare yourself for any accident with what is necessary.
Capitol .xviii.	Capitol .xviii.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Regarding fractures of the female chin and the bone of the pelvis and the male penis:
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the neck of the woman is broken, then make her sit in a slumped position, and then incline her slightly at the waist, and hold her from behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And then the midwife fills the neck with fat, and it is done in such a way that it forms around it like a sphere; and then the woman is shaken gently, and her back is raised little by little, because all of this helps until it is in front of the broken neck area and the broken bone returns to its place.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And then place pillows under her back, and when she wants to urinate, the fat is removed with ease, and then she urinates. Return it in the same manner as you placed it initially, and then return her to her original position on the pillow.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do this for seven days or around that time, because it is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you wish, take a sheep's bladder and attach one end of a reed tube to the injury; insert the entire bladder into her neck, and then blow into the tube with force until the bladder is inflated inside the neck, because this will help the fracture return to place.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And then it is filled with fat and kept for several days according to what we have recommended, until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bone of the ankle in men or women is fractured, then administer for its restoration and reduction what we have recommended for the hip bone.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And what is right is not hidden in these rare and nearby fractures, especially to one who has some study and practice and understands my book well; for that fracture signifies a major disposition toward the correct method in its restoration and reduction, and thus understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	But when the man's penis is fractured, take the wing of an ostrich, and place the penis inside it; then put a cloth wrapping over it, and wrap it up, and leave it like this for three days or around that time, and it will be healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	On the restoration of bone fractures when affected by inflammation.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is appropriate for one who suffers a fractured bone with inflammation, especially if the bone is large such as the femur or the jawbone, or similar to those, that you should cauterize and perform an incision on it immediately if the conditions for incision are present in you or testify as we have said above.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the wound flows with blood, then you must attend to stopping it by powdering crushed egg on the cut, unless another method is more suitable.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And then begin to restore the fracture on that very day, and do not delay this, unless an abscess occurs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	But if an abscess occurs, then you should delay the restoration until the ninth day, until the abscess has been resolved, and do not approach it on the third and fourth days, because you will cause bad complications.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	But if the broken bone protrudes above the skin, then you must reduce and align it using your hands with ease and minimal extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	But if extension is not prepared and the alignment with your hands, then you should reduce it using this instrument; the instrument which is made of iron, the length of which is seven or eight inches and the width of which depends on the extent of the injury; therefore, it is necessary for the doctor to take three or four of these according to what is needed for this in the treatment of all kinds of fractures.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And it should be round and have minimal thickness so that it does not bend when applying pressure on it during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And it has an acute extremity at which its edges are on its own extremities; and the upper part of it is mostly tending thickly, and from the middle of it into the partitions.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is its form:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is named in Greek "voluntary hernia," which is a small sac. 
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	And so it is necessary that the extremity of the injured area be raised above the prominent part of the bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And push that in at once while returning the bone to its place, and align it with some adjustment.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And therefore, strive to align the ends of the fracture together, and if the broken end is delicate and does not hold the instrument properly, then you must incise the end of that bone so that the instrument can have power over it.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	But if you cannot reduce the bone completely with what we have recommended, then incise it with one of the appropriate incisors that we have mentioned; or saw it with one of the saws in whatever manner is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	Then smooth out what remains rough and fragmented on the bone.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced, and during the reduction the patient experiences intense pain, then you know that the bone has not been returned to its natural position; and then do what you can to provide great relief to the patient.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your restoration of the bone is complete, then soak a cloth in black styptic wine, and especially if it is summer, do not place cerot or any other oily substance on the wound, so that it does not cause putrefaction and corruption.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then administer poultices at the time of the completion of the bone's restoration, and leave the wound uncovered in such a way that you cut the scab with scissors and use bandages according to the extent of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And be careful to not strain the wound with the fracture, for many times foolish doctors have done this, causing harm to their patients leading to death or a chronic illness that consumes or corrupts, which is gangrene.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if your bandage is light, soft, different from the bandage of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the wound is large or is a bad wound, and you fear those accidents we have mentioned, and find pain in the area, then it is not advisable to place poultices on it. Instead, use a bandage made of hard cloths instead of poultices and bind it tightly with them.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And after one or two days when the wound has started to generate pus, then you should remove the cloth that you had placed over it, and then apply plasters, ointments with which it is our custom to treat wounds, such as tetrapharmacon ointment and similar ones.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And it is necessary for you to loosen the bandage and examine the wound each morning and evening until it is consolidated and stabilized, and it must be that the limb be prepared in such a manner that pus runs from it to other parts with ease.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If many days have passed since the injury and it has not healed nor been separated from the arm, then you know that there are small complications for which you need to examine the wound with care.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those swellings that are separated, remove and extract them; those which cannot be separated and which affect the limb causing pain, you must incise them according to what is possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if you encounter the plague with pustules or blisters, which are signs of corruption and putrefaction, then it is necessary to apply one of those methods that is appropriate for it, following the treatment previously described in its respective chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And on this topic where my speech must focus and you pay attention: when the thick bone is fractured, incise above the limb as if it were the thigh bone or the helper and similar bones to those of large limbs, and do not assume traction from it nor its extraction, which can often lead to death; leave that part inside to rot, for in about twenty or thirty days it will fall out by itself; then treat the wound if you see it, and if not, leave it as is.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	On the treatment of nodulation that occurs at the site of some fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Here is the translation line by line:
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider if the swelling is recent and administer in those medicines that have astringent properties such as alum, salt, myrtle, sage, germander, and similar ones; thus you may take some or all of these, and soak them with an astringent wine, or with egg white, or with sweet wine, and place them on the swelling wrapped in tow, and bind them tightly over it with good constriction.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And leave the constriction on for several days without loosening it; then remove it and repeat another round until the swelling is reduced; or apply a piece of lead over it lightly, for lead has the property to reduce anything that is swollen in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if the swelling has already turned into a hard stone and is constricted, and it becomes necessary to carefully remove it, then cut it open at its highest point, and incise the excess and prominent part, or soak it with certain resins until it is reduced; care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	On the restoration of a fracture when it is restored and then the limb remains delicate and does not heal according to its natural state.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is restored, and the limb remains thin and weak afterwards, this does not happen except for several reasons: one of which is an excess of solution in the ligament and a ligation that was done improperly; or due to an abundance of tightness in the ligaments that prevents nourishment from reaching the limb; or because of excessive rubbing; or by unnecessary movement at the wrong time; or due to a lack of blood in the patient's body and their weakness.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the treatment for this is to feed the patient and make their heart tender until blood is multiplied in them; administer bathing; and bring joy and happiness to them.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	Then place a poultice on the limb, so that the poultice draws nutrients to it, or continue rubbing it with warm water until nourishment flows and returns to its natural state.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	On the treatment of fractured bones that are restored crookedly and prohibiting the proper operation for their correction.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When you encounter a restored limb near the healing of it from tortuosity and prominence at the broken bone and nodulation, and this is due to the shape deformation of the limb, yet however the limb is not prohibited from its natural function, therefore there is no need for you to believe in what someone claims that the limb has been newly broken.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	And there are indeed foolish doctors and restorers who have done this in our land; and this operation is greatly blameworthy, leading to great fear, the sign of which is deadly.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	But if the lameness and nodulation are recent, then they should be treated with tepid water in which softening herbs have been boiled, such as the leaves of elder and its roots, and melilot, and similar ones; and it is to be made into a poultice with a soothing plaster like well-made dyallaquilon; or mucilage from the root of elder should be mixed with green vitriol or oil of cerami, and applied as a plaster; or fat figs should be crushed with pigeon droppings, and similar medicines named for consolidation.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And sometimes it is dissolved with persistent gentle friction using wet hands, and the movement of the limb should be administered in all directions at all times.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	More if the tortuosity has already advanced and become strong and transformed into stone and necessitates treatment with iron, then it is necessary for the pus above to be removed and the continuation of the bone dissolved, and that which is superfluous from the knotting of those veins with the bone should be cut away with subtle incisors, and ease should be administered in that through diligence and study.
Capitol .xxiii.	The text appears to be in an archaic form
De sermo en dislocacio.	When discussing dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when you encounter a dislocation, then it is necessary to reduce it immediately and do not delay the reduction, for if it is delayed, the area becomes inflamed and makes the reduction of the dislocation difficult.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for this reason, it should not be massaged or stretched during the time of inflammation, because doing so often brings about spasms and increased pain.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	However, when this occurs, then you must prepare for the incision of the patient, and allow it to rest until the inflammation subsides; then the limb should be anointed with warm water and oil, and afterwards it can be reduced easily.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And every limb should be treated in such a way that the memory of its proper place will return. 
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And I have already ordered the chapters on dislocation as they precede in fracture; from the part of the body most supreme to the part more below.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Capitol .xxiiii.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	For the translation of the given sentence:
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	So dislocated the two jaws do not hurt; and the dislocation of both is done according to one of two ways: either they are displaced from their places by slight movement, and thus softened a little; or they are dislocated entirely and completely, within which time they are softened at the joint where saliva flows out of the patient and cannot hold it nor can they close their mouth, and the tongue of theirs is wrapped in their saliva.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	When the dislocation is slight, it often returns to its proper place with little cause on its own.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	But if the dislocation is complete and total, then it must be treated with a gentle reduction, and should not be delayed at all.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And it is that the minister holds the patient's head, and the doctor inserts the index finger of one hand into the area of dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth of the patient if the dislocation is on one side; or he inserts both index fingers together if the dislocation is on both sides, while the other fingers of his hands remain outside for support; and he commands the patient to relax their jaws and let them go from each side; and the doctor aligns the jaw and pushes the jaw until it returns to its place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction is difficult, and especially if both jaws are dislocated, then administer an evaporation with hot water and oil until a gentle reduction of both is made, and do not delay the reduction at all, as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And when they are returned and aligned, and the patient's mouth is closed and not loosened, then place a piece of cloth with wax over it, which should be made of wax and oiled linen; and then bind it easily with moist bandages.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient sleep on their back, and their head should be placed between two pillows, so that it does not turn to the right or left; and do not force them to chew anything; before their food is softened for them, until when the pains are alleviated and the jaws relaxed, then let them eat what they wish.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And this should be administered easily, and do not work on the appearance of the mouth until the food and drink have been consumed and digested, before the jaw is fastened and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if it is difficult to reduce two dislocated jaws when they are out of place and do not return to their proper positions, then often fevers occur and there is frequent urination, and the patient’s abdomen becomes very inflamed, and there is a strong tendency for pure bile to be vomited.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see this, then know that it is a sign of destruction; and often the one to whom this happens dies within ten days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	On the reduction of the dislocation of the collarbone and the end of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The collarbone is not dislocated inward due to its continuation with the ribs; and sometimes it is dislocated outward at the joint, and this is evident to the touch.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of it is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And then compress the area with your palm using strong pressure, for it will return to its place.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And then place an ointment and pillows over that area and support it firmly.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	However, the end of that which is connected to the shoulder and continues with it does not get dislocated at any time; therefore, it must be reduced and aligned as we have said and according to what you are equipped to do.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And then place over that a plaster, and pillows, and bandage, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until they are healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And with this method of treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the reduction of muscle dislocation.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle is dislocated in only three ways, one of which is when it is dislocated at the joint near the tendon.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is when it is dislocated at the upper part of the muscle, and this happens rarely; and it is not dislocated behind by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated in front by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And it is more frequently dislocated outward at the lower parts of the joint, especially in those whose muscles have less flesh, where it dislocates easily; but in those with more flesh, it comes out with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And it often happens that some people suffer from blows or falls, and the muscle of the affected area becomes inflamed with a hot swelling, and is considered to be dislocated by this.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then it is necessary that you proceed with this while you are well-prepared for it, and now progress in the treatment of him.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And the dislocation is known when it occurs at the junctions of the tendons; so that you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the normal muscle, for you will find clear differences between them; and you find a concavity at the head of the dislocated muscle where the tendon should be touched like an egg, and the patient cannot bring their hand to their ear nor move it in any way.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If the foot or toes are dislocated, and you now feel a clear touch, and it is not hidden. 
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And of this dislocation, easy reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction is when the minister raises the patient's arm to the parts above; and then places his own hands below the dislocated joint, and elevates the joint forcefully into its proper place, and the minister lifts the patient’s arm, extends it upwards; and then places it so that it returns gently.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	And if it does not return by what we have said and remains as it was at the beginning when the dislocation occurred, for many days, then the patient must be bathed in warm water and administered a potion that softens and relaxes as though it were boiled with roots of elder, fenugreek, and mint in water, and this should be given to them.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And then the patient should be placed on their back and something soft yet firm, like wool, should be placed under the dislocated joint. Then the doctor places his foot on the sphere (likely referring to a device used in this procedure), and raises the head of the muscle with strength, while pulling the patient’s arm so that it does not remain twisted at the parts below, and another assistant holds the patient's head so that it is not twisted at the parts below, because it will soon return to its proper place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, return that hernia in this manner: and it is that you make present a man who is taller than the patient, and stand on the side of that area, and insert his muscle under the swelling of the patient and raise the swelling so that the patient is suspended in air, and another assistant pulls the hand of the patient from the areas below his belly.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	And if the patient is light, then it is necessary that with him another cause be suspended, so as to weigh him down, because the dislocation returns quickly.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced in another manner: and it is that a long pole be fixed into the ground, the head of which is round in shape, like a mortar pestle, not too thick nor too thin, and then place it under the patient; after placing lion's cloth over the head of the pole, have the patient stand along the length of the pole, and extend his hand to the opposite side; and extend his body on the other side with strength, because the joint returns to its place quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if the reduction of it is difficult due to all the causes we have mentioned, then use this treatment: and it is that you take a pole whose length is two arms' spans, and the width of which is four fingers, and the thickness of which is adjusted according to the size of the swelling in this way:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And then place a linen cloth over the rounded head so that the wood does not hurt the patient. 
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And then the patient's head is placed down, and the hand or arm is extended over the stick between their parts, and the stick is tied around the helper and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Then place the arm on a step of a ladder according to its latitude, and the hand should be extended towards the parts below it, and the other body part should be suspended from the other side, for the joint will soon come into place.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the treatment of him is complete according to each manner that is possible for you, and then it is necessary that you place upon him the fine wool thread of equal quantity; and then apply a plaster prepared from powdered mallow with honey and egg white over all the muscle, in such a way that it covers above, and then tighten upon him the fine wool thread with decent binding; and the bandage shall be wrapped around the plaster, and his hand shall be attached to his neck, and it should be left, and his hand should not be moved for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And it is necessary that the food of the patient be reduced until the limb is strengthened, for it is easier on the recovery of him.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And then the food should be increased gradually over seven or five days and exercise should be undertaken; and if it is firm and not softened, then he is healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	But if the joint is dislocated repeatedly due to moisture that affects him or for another reason, then it is necessary to apply a cautery with three burns, as was previously stated in the chapter on cauterization.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this is done and after seven days the bandage is removed and the joint is not healed, and the plaster and binding are reapplied several times, yet it remains unhealed and the arm cannot be raised to parts above, then you know that the nerves of him, which are at the head of the muscle, have already been cut or stretched or weakened, and understand that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	And for the dislocation that occurs in the feet and the ankle or the parts behind it, the reduction is made with impulse and extension using the hands, until it returns to its proper position.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And apply another binding in that area, and care for it until it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if during the healing process you notice heaviness in the limb and slowness in its movement, then the patient should use baths multiple times until that heaviness is alleviated and it returns to its original natural state.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the treatment of dislocation of the knee.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	Know that the joint of the knee is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated in all directions, and more so from the front part towards the back part. The dislocation of it is not hidden from you when you see the shape or feel the touch according to whatever figure it is dislocated into, and when you adjust the dislocated knee with your hand, it is clearly evident to you because the joint is concaved and cannot bend the leg, nor can it touch its own muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And it is necessary to cool and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before it becomes inflamed with a carbuncle, for if it does become inflamed with a carbuncle, the reduction of it becomes difficult, and even then it is not fully healed; especially when it is in the back part, for it is worse than all other types of dislocations, causing more pain, and often leads to death with that condition.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of it, when it is one that can be reduced, is to extend the leg with two hands and expand the arm. The doctor's hands should be on the knee and below it, and he should push the joint with the tips of his fingers together, or with the edge of his palm until it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	And if the dislocation is in the front parts, then return it such that you bend the hand with your hand, until you hit the knee with the edge of your palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not obey reduction, then administer strong extension and forceful motion.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And it is such that two ministers extend the arm, and hold that limb with two ministers so that the extension is not hindered.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	Then the arm should be rotated in all directions, since it is wrapped with a long folded cloth over his hand or joint.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, anoint that area with some oil so that it facilitates the causes which help in lubricating the joint easily; then push the joint forcefully until it returns to its place.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	Then for the reduction of a dislocated shoulder, it should be placed on that bandage which has styptics and plasters with egg white, and it should be drawn out with a downward traction, and the arm should be suspended from the neck, and left like this for several days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	Then it should be loosened; and if the joint is returned to its proper place, then you untie the binding from it and leave it.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see the joint not well healed, then you repeat the plaster and the bandage, and leave it for several days until it is healed; and then remove it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	And if you encounter a serious injury near the reduction of the joint, and its position is in motion, then administer moistening with baths and gentle friction, and compression until it is relieved; or place something over the joint that allows for movement, which is a matter of fatty motion; and then bind it, leaving it on the bone day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then remove that, and place it in a bath; when it is soaked, then you rub the joint with mild friction, and then repeat over that which allows for movement, which is a matter of swollen motion, once, and the second time, and the third time.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	using bath immersion until it is smoothed out.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, place on that a split from a moist and scraped cow's hide and bind it tightly; do this several times, for it being moist will help return it to its proper position.
Capitol .xxviii.	The given text appears to be in an old Romance language that
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	For the treatment of dislocation of joints, specifically of the joint between the arm and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	When the joint of the hand is sometimes dislocated, and the reduction of its dislocation is light, but the opposite is true for other joints; however, it must be done quickly in reducing it at the moment when it becomes dislocated, before the area becomes inflamed or an abscess forms there.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of its dislocation is that you place the patient's hand joint on a table and the assistant stretches out that hand, while the doctor places their hand or palm on the prominence of the joint and pushes until it returns to its proper place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, it must be considered that if the palm is already facing upwards on the back of the hand, then the patient should place the back of their hand on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation occurs on the back of the hand, then the position of the hand should be placed naturally on the table so that the doctor's hand can press directly on the prominence of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And if it returns immediately, that is good; and if not, then strengthen that area with gentle binding to prevent inflammation and leave it thus; do not repeat this process, because if you do, it will not tolerate or allow for the reduction of pus that may form over the days.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	But however the joint remains according to its curvature; and you do not notice any cause in the patient, except that the hand is softened and cannot grasp anything; then know that the nerves are cut or crushed, and now there should be no remedy but to tighten it with a cautery near the site of injury, and thus confer some relief.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	When the dislocation has been returned, then place on it the bandage we have recommended, and let it be left and tightened for five days; then untie it, leave it, and exercise the patient's hand.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	But if the movement of it is restricted and you encounter some severity in it, then relieve it with warm water and friction several times until it is alleviated.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	On the treatment of dislocation of the fingers.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Sometimes the fingers are dislocated in any direction.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when any of those fingers is dislocated on the back or the palm side, then hold the finger and push the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And then support the head of the finger, suspend that part which is dislocated, and leave it like this for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then suspend it and extend it until it is straightened out on that same day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when it can stand upright, bind it according to that method, and do not stop loosening it during the day and exercising with movement, and bind it at night; do this for many days until it is straight.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And do similarly if it is dislocated at the wrist; bind it to that part and perform this as your first procedure until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And similarly do this when it is dislocated in other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	On the treatment of dislocation of the spine vertebrae.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When a complete dislocation occurs in any of the spine or neck vertebrae and multiple vertebrae are displaced from their positions, there is no cure in such a case, for death is expected in the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And the sign of this is that the excretion of the patient occurs outside their will, and they cannot retain it; and often some parts of his body or one of his thighs or two arms or one of them become soft; or a vertebra is displaced from its place, for often it is dislocated or replaced in four directions.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	And when it is dislocated to the rear parts, it is called gelbozitation (a made-up term, likely referring to a specific medical condition related to dislocation). 
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	Here is the translation of the sentence:
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	Here is the translation of the given text line by line:
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And it says that in gout which affects the front part of the feet, there is neither remedy nor healing for that; and similarly in that which occurs on both sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And of those, it is only cured when it affects the back properly with what I recommend.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And it is that the patient should be lying face down on a soft pillow near the wall, and their legs should be stretched out below them with a moist poultice so that their feet are not damaged.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	Then a straight stick should be placed, inserted into the ground at the end of the pillow near their head, and another stick across their feet at the other end of the pillow.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And the attendant should hold one stick, and it should not be fixed in a hole; another attendant should hold the other stick in the same manner.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Then wrap around the head of the patient and below it loosely with a bandage; extend one end of the bandage to the stick that is near their head, and tie it there; then tighten another bandage over their hips, towards the lower part of their legs, and toward their chest; finally adjust all the bandages and tie them to the other stick that is near their feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And then the minister extends the ligament to the part of the bone, and the two bones and the ligaments are not left in their original places where they were attached, but rather they are not fixed as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor places his palms on the spine with strength until it returns, or he places the patient on a table, and then adjusts the patient's feet on the table until it returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	And if it does not return in this manner, then take a table whose width or length is about three cubits, and make an opening in the wall near the patient into which one end of the table can fit.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And then place the middle of the table on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and pulls strongly so that the spine is compressed and returns to its proper position.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you want, use a wrench that is turned by hand; and when you place it on the ground, position the patient’s head at the end of two wooden handles, each of which should be the length of an arm, and place the patient's head at the end of these two handles as well; and the distance between each handle should be a palm's width, and already there is a hole drilled in each handle through which the wrench turns, and each one should be firmly fixed to the ground so that it does not move.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And there should be one round handle in which the wrench is placed, and it should rotate within the two holes of the two handles.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of it, there is a hole in which the handle is fitted, the length of which is one palm including what rotates; and the two other handles are similar to this one.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then tighten the ropes that you have tied to the patient's feet in the hole where the patient’s head is placed, and the ropes that you have tied to the patient's thighs in the wrench where the patient’s feet are placed.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then each wheel should be turned by a minister who twists the wheel with their hand, and the doctor applies the splint as we have said. 
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the form of the treatment:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And then ensure that the vertebra is returned to its place, and the area is levelled; at this point it is necessary to apply a drying poultice with egg white, and then tow; and then place on top of the poultice a strip of board whose width is three fingers or about that, and the length of which should be sufficient to cover the area of ​​the swelling, and over the part of the vertebra.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then bind it with the bandage that we have mentioned, and let the patient consume subtle nourishment until they are healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if any prominence remains in the area at the end of the healing process, then it is necessary to administer medicines that mollify and cleanse through prolonged use of the board we have recommended; and a plate of lead is already applied to that area.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And sometimes prominence occurs in the area of the vertebrae of the back, and it is caused by that dislocation; and it is that bone which protrudes, so it should not be treated with this medicine, for using it could cause fatal harm to you.
Capitol .xxxi.	Capitol .xxxi.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	For the translation of the given line:
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Know that the joint of the bone and the joint of the muscle only suffer from dislocation alone, and do not apply to them what you apply to other joints with small movement and concavity.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the joint of the ankle is dislocated in four ways, for it is dislocated inward, or outward, or forward, or backward.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And it is most often dislocated inward, and rarely forward or backward.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And the sign of its dislocation inward is that when you align the leg of the affected side with the healthy side, it appears longer and the heel is more prominent than on the healthy side, and the patient cannot bend their foot towards the little toe, and it is at this location where an inflammatory swelling may occur, so that the head of the thigh bone has already reached here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the sign of its dislocation outward is that the symptoms are contrary to those [of dislocation inward].
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	And the sign of its dislocation forward is that the leg extends completely, but it cannot bend due to the pain in the heel, and if one attempts to walk, they cannot do so forward; the urine is retained, and there is an inflammatory swelling on the knee, and movement is restricted near the ankle.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And the sign of one to whom a dislocation in the rear parts occurs is that he cannot stretch out his leg, nor can he bend the front part before bending the knee, and the thigh on that side is shorter than the other, and the knee is softened, and the head of the femur has moved from its place.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	More on the reduction of this type of dislocation is that you consider now, if the dislocation is old and ancient, which has already become fixed with having it near to you administer its reduction, and remain in its position; then it is not entirely within that cure; and therefore there should be no presumption in that. 
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	And for the one in whom the dislocation is recent and it is one of the four types of dislocation, then you must take care to return the joint and extend it to its inner parts and outer parts, and move it to the right and left, because with strength it will return and does not require further treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	However, if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a strong assistant and extend the arm of the patient from below, or by his hands, or with a bandage that is tied over the arm above the elbow; and another assistant extends the hand of the patient upwards so that he places his hands under the armpits; and then bind tightly with a linen band around the root of the thigh, and have another assistant hold the end of the bandage.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And the extension of it or of the inner part to the angle at the collarbone area, or from the back part to the shoulder blade area.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And this extension of all these should be done at once while the patient is lifted with their body off the ground and remains hanging.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this kind of extension is common to all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And therefore, if the dislocation returns with what we have said, it will be good; and if not, then it is necessary in every way to speak of the proper treatment.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of the joint, when it is dislocated and the dislocation is within the parts, the patient should be laid on their side; then place the ligaments over the thigh's ridge at that spot between the head of the thigh and where the kneecap lies; then extend the ligament upwards from the knee area to the higher part of the fork (femur).
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	Then another assistant should take the arms of the patient, grasp the thick part of the diseased thigh firmly, and extend it outward with strong force, for this will return it to its proper place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this method is a more gentle cure with which this member is reduced compared to the other methods.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	However, if it is necessary for you and you do not obey the treatment with this method of cure entirely, then it is necessary to bind both feet of the patient together with a strong, gentle ligament around both ankles and both toes.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And let the length of each thigh be four fingers wide, and let the patient's chest be extended two fingers more than the other.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And then the patient should be suspended over a pole, and it should be in the house; and the length of the pole from the ground should be two arms' lengths.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And then command a strong young man to hold the patient's leg at the knee, and have another young man hanging on the other end of the patient, and as the second young man forcefully pushes the thigh, the joint returns to its place quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	And in the proper reduction, when there is a dislocation at the joint that has moved outward, the patient must lie on their back according to what we have recommended in having coldness; and the limb of the affected side should be strongly positioned over the chest area properly and over the feet.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And then two sticks are placed, one under the feet and the other under the head; and then sticks adjusted to the middle of the thigh should be wrapped with wet cloths so that the patient is not harmed by the stick being between their thighs, for you must ensure that the extension to the parts below is not hindered.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And then each minister extends to their part, and the doctor with his hand equalizes the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Therefore, if it yields to the reverse, it will heal greatly; otherwise, place something on it diligently as we have said in the case of gout for equalizing it.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	But it is necessary that the patient lies on their side quietly.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is in the front parts, then it is necessary that the chest be extended slightly, and this follows the same method as described for the thigh; the doctor places the palm of their right hand on the diseased joint, and then compresses it with the other hand, and with this compression extends the part below to the area of the neck.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is in the rear parts, then it is not necessary for the patient to be extended towards those parts, and they should be raised above the ground; however, it must be placed on a hard surface, just as one would do if the hip joint is dislocated outward, according to what we have said about placing them over two boards; and they are face down with the limbs extended, as we have mentioned, there should be no delay.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And it must be that compression with a board is administered to the place where you have the joint.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Thus, when the reduction is completed as it should be — and the sign of the reduction is not hidden from you, which is that you extend both thighs of the patient, and when you see them equal and the patient straightens their thigh and extends it to its natural position, then you know that the limb has returned as it should — at this point, you align both hips and place a pad and straighten with a bandage so that the joint is not displaced in any part; and secure the patient to rest for three or four days.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And then untie the bandage and the poultice, and compare one leg with the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	When you see those marks clearly, then know that the dislocation is already fixed, and then let the patient go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any cause of softening, then return and apply a plaster to that area, extend it according to your initial structure, and leave it for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And then untie that, and let it rest in ambulation on each part for several days until it is strengthened.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On the treatment of dislocation of the jaw.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The jaw is dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated outward, inward, and more towards the back; it cannot be dislocated forward.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of its dislocation is that you ask the patient to touch their knee with their chin; then you will know that the jaw is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all the ways of him is that you make the patient stand straight, so that he extends his own leg, if possible; bring your back to his face, and place his foot between your feet; then adhere his chin with your palms, and hold those between your fingers on his chin with strength, and another minister extend his leg while the chin returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And a sign of recovery is that his chest adheres to his thigh with effortless ease.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then apply a plaster to that and make the chest adhere to the thigh, then bind those areas with a bandage for three or four days, and then unbind those.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not let the patient walk for several days until they are healed and strengthened.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	But if returning it to its proper place is necessary, then administer strong extension with the ligaments, as previously described in the treatment of the hip.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	On the treatment of dislocation of the talus.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The talus is sometimes displaced by a small movement, and at other times it is dislocated completely, and this dislocation can occur either towards the inside or towards the outside.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of its dislocation is that sometimes the talus swells at the site to which it has been dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	And the treatment for removing it is generally beneficial, and it should be extended with ease using the hands and smoothed out before returning.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	Here is the translation of the provided line:
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And then you take hold of the foot with your right hand on the upper part, and with your left hand on the lower part of the foot near the ankle.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with your left hand for two times, and then extend with your left hand; and push the toes of the foot with your right hand away from the chest.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And do this two times as we have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then push the toes of the foot towards the chest for the third time, and you should be at the ankle.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	Thus, return in one step or two following this method, and if you rotate the foot inward, that is good; and if not, then repeat the operation on it, for that will make it return.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if it is prohibited for you to reduce it by the method we have recommended, then have the patient lie on their back on the ground, and place a small bolster tightly in the ground, positioned between the patient's thighs, and you should wrap a cloth around it so that the patient does not feel any discomfort.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And then the minister holds their thighs, and another minister extends the foot with his hands or with a band that lies over the heel of the foot; and then each minister extends against the extension of his partner, and the penis is extended between the patient's thighs maintaining that position so that the body of the patient is not pulled to either side by its extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And then the doctor realigns the dislocation with his hands, and another minister holds the healthy thigh to either side, for the dislocation returns with ease. 
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And thus when the dislocation is returned and the health of the reduction is declared to you, then apply a plaster and tightly bind it with bandages, and tie the foot to the chest with bandages.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And you must be careful or guard against the nerves that are behind the ankle, because the bandage over that area should not be too tight and cause great harm.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And then leave it for two days or three; and if the swelling is softened, remove it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And then unbind it on the third day or the fourth, and forbid the patient from bathing for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if it is necessary to go before that time, there is no guarantee that the dislocation will not be dissolved and corrupted, and then it will not receive proper healing.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if you apply cauterization to the abscess, then it is necessary that you administer in the reduction of it what was previously described in our narration, in another place for treatment and application, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter XXXIV.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	On the treatment of dislocation of the toes of the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	It is necessary that the dislocated area be stretched slightly without much force; and this is not difficult, as it should be gentle.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	But if the dislocation is in the knuckles of the toes on the foot, then it is necessary to have the patient place their foot on a flat surface of the ground or on a table, and remain thus as if walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And then you stand on your feet, and place your foot over the area where you suspect the joints are affected, and then press that area with your foot firmly so as to make it return to its place, and ensure that area is flattened and no swelling appears in that spot.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And then place his abdominal area on a board that covers the entire foot, which has two supports, and then tighten that area with proper and firm binding for three days; and then loosen that binding and let it rest by walking for several days, until it is tightened again and recovery is ensured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter .xxxv.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Of the types of dislocations that are caused by blows or fractures or by any of these together.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any of those causes occur, and you proceed with the treatment and restoration of it, death often follows.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And by this, one should not presume to treat it unless they are wise in the art, experienced for a long time, merciful and pious, cautious, not rash nor presumptuous; and that they use at the beginning medicines that only slightly reduce inflammation without solely relying on divine judgment, but rather hope for health from harm, relief from the illness, and in which there appears some hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And then strive to perform the reduction of it at the beginning of the cause, before inflammation sets in.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then if the limb returns as we want, administer a regimen that reduces inflammation and treats the wound with one of the drier ointments suitable for it.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if the dislocation is accompanied by a fracture and occurs in separately situated bones, then you should set them, doing as we have said for simple injuries of this kind in the areas where these are located.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And guard and avoid according to your virtue those from the instruments in the paths of fear as my preaching precedes you; for this is better for you to serve your Creator, and more lasting for your glory, and more beneficial to your body you will see these in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.
Amen.	The given text "Amen
