Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begins the words of Albucasis.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre,  
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For the operation with a hand is so rare in our region and in our time that it is completely neglected, except for some who risk their knowledge of it, and its traces remain; and nothing remains of it but small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have been altered by most and led to those errors and superstitions where the intentions behind it are sealed off and its force and art are stretched thin.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it seems to me that I revitalize that through the order of this treatise in accordance with the method of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and for that reason it comes with the forms of the tools of cautery and the other instruments of the work as by addition of the declaration, and for preparation of it, which cause is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	But the reason why no good artisan is found with his hand in this our time is that the art of medicine is long and requires its practitioner to be exercised in the science of anatomy, which tells us how one knows the joints of the members and their forms; and has knowledge of the bones, nerves, and ligaments, and their number and extension; and of the pulsating veins and the quiet ones, and the places from where they emerge.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And for this reason Hippocrates says that in the name there is little, but in the deed it is more significant, and especially so in the art of the hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	But we have already said about this in the introduction of this book; for whoever is not knowledgeable about what we have said concerning anatomy will likely fall into error, through which many people may die, as I have seen too many instances of this. For some are formed in this science and then stray from it due to a lack of knowledge and experience.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For I saw an inexperienced and unskilled doctor incise an scrotal abscess on a woman's groin, and cut some arteries in the process, causing a great deal of blood to flow, leading to the woman dying in the arms of those present.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another doctor who took out a stone from a man who had suffered in his state, and the stone was large, and he came to him and extracted that stone with a piece of the bladder, because that man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I have already called for help to extract it, and I saw that because of the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, he would die under it.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And you saw another doctor who received payment from a duke of our land for surgery, and came upon a castrated black man who had a fracture in his thigh; and the doctor prepared with his ignorance, extracted the fracture, over the wound, with pillows and splints with strong binding, and did not leave the wound any outlet to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And then untie the bandage according to his desires, and then dress the wound, and keep it dry for several days and command that we loosen the binding; and thus wait until the thigh and foot are free of inflammation, and they reach recovery. 
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I was called to him, and prepared to untie the bandage, and relief from his pain was achieved.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	However, if corruption was already confirmed in the limb, because it could not be restrained, and the corruption did not cease to spread throughout the limb until the patient was in peril.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another doctor who pierced a cancerous abscess, and it became ulcerated over the course of several days, until the malignancy of it was magnified under the care of the doctor.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The cause is that the cancerous growth is pure of melancholy humor, so it is not necessary for it to be treated with iron altogether, but rather the limb which suffers should be amputated entirely.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for this reason, sons, it is necessary for you to plan the operation in two divisions: one is an operation associated with health, and the other is work where there is peril in the most critical conditions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already pointed this out in every part of this book where there is an operation involving error and fear; therefore, it is necessary for you to pay attention to this and leave that, so that the pages do not lead you to speak improperly and dishonor you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore take up your weapons with diligence and protection of God, and treat your patients with happiness and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best way through the grace of God to lead to health and successful recovery, and leave behind terrible diseases that are hard to cure, and keep your defenses against what makes you fear, so that doubt in your faith and in your name does not escape from you: for it is more fitting for your glory, and more so in this world and afterwards in your holiness.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	When translating this line by line from the given medieval medical treatise-like text into English, we can interpret:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Do not treat a bad illness, so that you are not called a bad doctor.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have already divided this book into three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter is ordered from head to foot, in the forms of the instruments and in the tools of the cauteries, and of what is necessary in the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, on drying and piercing, and on cupping, and on plasters, and on the extraction of arrows and similar objects, all chaptered and ordered according to the forms of the instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	The division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the treatment of fractures and similar conditions; a chapter ordered from head to foot, and on the forms of the instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	On cauteries with fire and with sharp medicine and a reminder of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	With this, the treatise on the entire book begins.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	It is necessary for me to say the quality of the benefits of that cautery and its harms, and in which conditions cautery is prohibited.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore, I say that the discussion about the quality of the benefit and harm of cauterization is long and tedious, subtle due to knowledge, and hidden secret; many wise people have already spoken about it, and they disagree on it, and for me, a small part of their discussions is enough, fearing lengthiness.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore it is said that cautery helps all kinds of swellings universally, which can be with or without matter, except for two types of swellings, which are swellings that do not contain any matter.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the dry swelling without matter, opinions differ; for some say that cautery is beneficial for this condition, while others say the opposite, that cautery is not suitable for a disease which is characterized by heat and dryness, because the nature of fire is heat and dryness, and it would be inappropriate to treat a hot and dry disease with something that is burnt and dry.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And let those who say the opposite explain that cautery is beneficial in all hot and dry diseases that occur in human bodies, for when you compare the body of a person and its humidity to the composition of fire, you find that the human body is cold. 
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say by the words of that person, who has experienced this to me several times openly. 
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	But nevertheless, it is not necessary for one who has already been exposed and exercised in the chapter of cautery from previous practice, and who has known the diversity of human composition and the disposition of diseases within them, and their causes, and the accidents thereof, and the time span of those.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	And in other complications, there is no need for fear, especially in cold and humid diseases, because all doctors agree on these, and they do not disagree about treating them with cautery.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, sons, that of the secret of healing by cautery with fire and its goodness, especially concerning cautery combined with burning medicine, it is clear that fire is simple, the action of which only reaches the member that is cauterized and does not affect another adjacent member except with minor harm.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	More the action of burning medicine reaches that which disperses in the limbs, and strongly brings illness to the afflicted member, making it difficult to heal and causing great harm.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	More the fire, by its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, does not do this without overflowing; And it is already known to us through experience and through the length of service in studying the art about the truth of causes; and for that reason I am excused from the length of speech. And if it were not for the fact that my book has not been read in this pause, hidden with fire, and the quality of its operation on bodies and of its expulsion by which you expel diseases, demonstrated philosophically, would be keenly useful to your pains.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, sons, that they forget the time in which it is appropriate to perform cautery and consider the best time of spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that cautery is appropriate at all times, so that the harm caused by accidental delay is outweighed by the benefit of what is drawn out by the cautery, and especially if the cautery is for necessary pains or severe pains, strong and urgent, which do not tolerate delay because it is feared that malice will come from them, which is worse than a small harm entering over time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And this does not concern your feet, or, sons, this is only esteemed by the common people and foolish doctors, which means that for that disease which is cured with cautery it is not always advisable, and they pause at that consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not as they think it to be because of this, for cautery is only a substitute for medicine that alters the composition and dries out the humidities which are the cause of the pains.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	However, excessive cauteries are harmful to medicine due to the desire for its usefulness and the virtue of its operation and the greatness of its master.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that his illness may return at some time in the future, according to the complexity of the patient and the location of his illness, and his strength, and what has been prepared within his body by the accumulation of excesses within him, and what he has acquired through food and similar causes; but the illness in which a cautery is administered should be an illness subtle in members with few excesses and humidity, like a dental cautery for pain and similar to that, it is possible that such pain may not return to him, although this happens rarely.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And the common saying is that cautery is the last resort of medicine, and this saying is true, not in the sense that those who understand it mean, for I believe that there is no cure that truly benefits from medicine or any other cause near cautery. 
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is contrary to that; and the intention that cautery is the last remedy of medicine is not simply when we administer the methods of cure in some diseases, and those medicines do not help, and then at the end of the treatment, one administers cautery, and it proves beneficial for that.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And now from here on, that cautery is the last remedy of medicine does not follow the understanding which the common people and many foolish doctors comprehend.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they said this only because of the purity of gold and the nobility of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the location of the cautery does not matter, but this is not absolutely true, for I have tested this and found that it only applies to some bodies and not others, and cautery with gold is good and better than with iron as they said; however, when you perform cautery with fire using gold, it is not straightforward, for gold melts according to the quantity you want due to its softness, and it prepares to receive heat; and if you place fire on it, the gold melts from the heat, and small flakes may fall into the fire, which the craftsman must remove because of this hindrance.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And by this, cautery is performed with an iron that we use lightly and precisely for the correctness of the operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already arranged this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and I have organized those of the head among the feet, so that I can quickly provide the inquirer with what they want from it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	From cautery for headache due to coldness and humidity.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cautery is applied to humidity and coldness on the affected area, which are the causes of excessive and various rheumatic flows, called "corissa," from the head to parts of the eyes and ears flowing, along with excessive sleep, toothache, and jaw pain, and generally all diseases that come from coldness, such as paralysis, dropsy, apoplexy, and similar ailments in those diseases.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cautery is as follows: first, command the patient to be purged with a laxative medicine for three or four nights, according to the strength of the patient, their age, and their habits.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command him to shave his head with a razor. Then have the patient sit between your hands on a lowered bench and place his hands on his feet.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then place the tip of your palm near the forehead on the ridge of the nose between his eyes.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, when the middle part of the area has been reached, mark that spot with a finger, and then ignite the olive-shaped cautery which is in this form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then place that on the marked area with caution, in such a way that it descends gradually, with which your hand is gently pressed little by little, and you rotate it.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then lift your hand gently and look at the area, and if you see any part of the bone exposed, about the size of a grain of barley, then raise your hand, and if it does not return with that tool, use another one, if it has cooled down, until the bone is seen as I have told you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a little salt and dissolve it over the area and leave it for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then place over it a cloth soaked in oil and leave it there until the heat of the burn is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with a four-part medicine until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And it has also been said that when the wound remains open, it is better to wash it with honey, because it is better and more beneficial.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And some of them said that the area around the bone should be cauterized, and the cautery should be held until some part of the substance of the bone adheres to it.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then remove what is adhered to the bone, and then clean it.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And others said that with the cautery, reach the inner part until you press strongly into the bone until it smokes, and this is the method of performing a small alphectomy. 
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they believe that from that place escape the vapors from the head.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And if the wound is kept open for a long time, then it should be treated before it becomes consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	But I have not seen these two types of cautery used altogether, except in some people as a method of precaution; and leave that aside, you must tell me, it is better for health when it happens; for the head is damaged by the disruption of its continuity just as we have testified in other members, and especially when the patient's head is of fragile nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first type of cautery is safer and better, you must tell me; and with that method and by working in this way, it is more healthful.
Capitol segon.	Second chapter.
Del cauteri del cap.	About the cautery of the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When chronic and long-lasting pain occurs throughout the head and this condition is prolonged in the patient, and treatments with scrapes, poultices, head cleansings, plasters, washes, ointments, salves, and similar remedies have been used, especially if it has already been cauterized with a cautery that has contaminated or not benefited the patient from those causes, then consider whether the patient's head is of strong constitution by nature; and if it is not fragile and finds significant resistance, then cauterize it with another type of cautery leaving that one aside for a while.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then cauterize that area over the horn of his head with a cautery until the swelling is divided. 
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the vein and expose the bone by the amount we have recounted and cauterize that area with a cautery on the back part of the head in the spot which is called the sinus — and it is that spot where the suction cup is placed.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And move your hand in this manner, and do not expose the bone, for the patient will find much greater pain from this different from the pain of all other head cauteries.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I describe this cautery in its place, for the cautery with which you cauterize the frontal and occipital parts of the head is a more delicate cautery than that with which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is its form.
Capitol ters.	Chapter three.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	On the cautery of non-traditional migraine.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When severe pain occurs in the part of the head or is felt within the eye, the head should be cleansed with medicines, and other treatments, which I have described in the sections on diseases, should be administered; if all this does not help, then cautery can be applied in two ways: either by means of an acute burning medicine or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	And using a burning cautery with medicine means that you take an iron rod, heat it up and apply the ends to both sides of the area.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then cut into the painful area on the temple with a slanted lancet such that it is placed at the spot where the vein is hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And then apply pressure on it using a bandage for constant compression, and leave it in place for three hours; then remove the bandage and draw out the liquid, and let the wound be open for two or three days, and finally place something over it that has been soaked in broth until the area becomes red.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish, do this with some caustic medicines which I have written about in the two treatises on caustic medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Perform the cautery with iron according to this method: heat the cautery iron, which has the following form:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	It is called "claus clavilhs" because the end of it resembles the shape of a clove with some curvature, and in the middle part of it, there is a small prominence.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And then place your hand over the painful area and hold it there—so that the artery underneath does not adhere—and gently rotate the small iron object with speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the quantity that is adhered by the pressure of the chain is such that it covers half of it, lift your hand so that the artery underneath does not adhere, to prevent a flow of blood.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then soak a cloth in salt water and place it on the area, leave it there for three days; then apply a cloth smeared with ointment, and continue treating it with ointment until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you need to, cauterize using the tip of the cautery iron like a cautery, and be careful not to cut the artery in this specific modern way.
Capitol quart.	Chapter four.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	On the cautery of ancient migraines.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat migraines using the methods we have discussed previously and those mentioned in the sections on diseases, and if the treatment does not prove effective, and sometimes due to the severity of the disease, what has been said about the initial cautery with medicine or cautery with fire is insufficient, then you must heat the cautery iron until it becomes white-hot, and mark the area of pain with a line as long as half a finger or so; and then remove your hand once and press firmly before cutting into the artery and reaching the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuation of the jaw's movement, which is harmful due to chewing, and that the tendon not be adhered and the nerve which moves it not become spasmed.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the protection and caution of blood flow from an artery that is being cut, for in its cutting there is fear, especially for one who does not know what they are doing and is not studious or experienced; and leaves the operation at its beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And I come with a reminder of the regimen for blood flow accidents in arteries according to its manner, in its place in this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see this disease and find that this cautery is not enough and the patient's body is tolerable, apply the cautery to the middle of the head as we have described, and treat the ailment until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you wish, administer the cautery which we have mentioned in the chapter on arterial bleeding, using a cautery with two blades, and this is a better and more effective cautery.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	On the cautery of ear pains.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When pain in the ear is caused by cold and is treated with laxatives and other treatments that I have mentioned in the division, and if the pain persists, then apply the cautery, which is called "puncta," and this is its form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And then apply the cautery around the ear as if a ring is turned around it, or along the circumference of each part if the pain is in specific parts.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Stretch out with the knife cautery along the rim of the earlobe gradually so that you have sensed the area with your fingers.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery of these points is done throughout the entire ear, and dry that area, then treat the places in between so they may heal.
Capitol .vi.	Capitol .vi.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Of the cauterization of tumors.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	A tumor that is treated and cured by cauterization is one of the kinds that come from phlegm, according to what we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cauterization for the type that results from drying or spasm of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that kind of tumor with herbs, purges, and fumigations, and if your treatment does not provide comfort, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries: the first should be at the lobe of the ear, the second a little below their temple, and the third at the junction of two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And place your cautery on the opposite side of the diseased part, because alleviation does not come except to the part that appears healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the method of cauterization is to cauterize that area with a cautery at the top of the highest earlobe, a little above the horn of the head, and on another temple, the length of which should be according to the length of the little finger. Then place your hand with the cautery until half the thickness of the skin is burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cautery, which is a special type of knife, the shape of which is here described.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	But nevertheless, it is more subtle than what you see a bit like this; and it requires removing some of the excessive thickness in part.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with what has been previously prepared until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	It seems like you've provided a chapter or section
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	This phrase appears to be in a medieval Latin-like language and refers to the cauterization of old apoplexy. Here's
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is old and you have treated it with what we have said but your treatment does not agree and the patient has no fever, then cauterize that area with four cauteries: on all the corners of their head; and with one cautery in the middle of the head, as we have said; and with one cautery on the nape of the neck.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the method of the cautery is done according to what has been said above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it has already been cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; it is better to do it behind; then treat it with what you have prepared.
Capitol .viii.	It seems like you've indicated the start of Chapter
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	This phrase appears to be in a medieval Latin-like language and refers to the cauterization of forgetfulness caused by a flame. Here is the translation:
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	It is necessary that at the beginning of the treatment, large seeds and pills cleansing the kidneys be given to the patient.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And then shave the head of the patient completely and place on their skull the plaster described in the chapter on plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And apply that several times, for that is a method of cautery.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do this according to the order of the doctors, which I have already mentioned.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And if healing is good through those means; and if not, then apply three cauteries on the back part of his head, which should descend from the highest part of the head towards the lower part near the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And place between each cautery the width of a thick finger, and then treat the cautery with what has been described.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	But if you add more and the patient can tolerate it, then apply a cautery in the middle area; and if you want to increase further, now cauterize that over both sides.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Then treat that area until it heals; and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to the form previously given.
Capitol .ix.	Capitol .ix.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	Of cautery of the bladder and the soothing of the entire body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	You must proceed with the modification of the head using jars and what has been mentioned; then shave the patient's head, and then cauterize that area with a cautery at the middle of the head, and with a cautery over all the corners of the head, and with a cautery on the back part of it, and with three cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the illness of excessive body soothing and the patients tolerate it and the illness is severe, then cauterize that area with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and finally with a cautery where the spinal cord ends, and raise your hand slightly.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	Then treat that area until it is healed, and this should be done with an olive cautery.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	On the cautery for epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	The epileptic should not be cauterized unless the epilepsy is caused by phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And therefore, it is necessary to clean the brain of the patient at the beginning with herbs and with the other cure that we have mentioned in the section when the illness is severe and the patient can tolerate the exception of the medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who does not tolerate the medicines, then administer small amounts and mix them with foods that are easily digestible, for several days beforehand, improving the quality of the food.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize that with a cautery in the middle of the head according to the previous method, and with another cautery on the back of the head, and on each temple of the head it is also cauterized.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize that with the cauteries I have mentioned, having paralysis and softening of the body over the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And let it be an olive cautery according to what is precedent.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is a child, then apply a gentle cautery according to this method.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On the cauterization for melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humors and thick phlegm, then cauterize that with the cauteries we have mentioned, causing paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is an excess that turns to melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give them something to drink that purifies their brain according to what has been previously stated in the section.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And then shave the head of the patient, and then make a properly formed cross on top of the circle, and then place that in the middle of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And the patient should be laid down, and held firmly from all sides.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	Then apply an ointment; and it is better to use sheep's fat.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And warm that over the fire for moderate heating, which should be tolerated when it is placed on him.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	Then place that at the top of his head in the circle, and let it be rubbed inside so that it is warmed.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do this with the patient once a week for the entire week, along with other good treatments until he is healed; or if you wish, cauterize that area by making small points according to what suits him best, but ensure your hand holds a cautery arranged in this way: this type of cautery moistens the brain equally.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	Then place that piece wrapped in fat or in flax ashes.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On the cautery of water descending into the eye.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When it is declared that the flow of water in the body has begun by the signs which I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient something that purifies his head, and protect it from all moistures.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And let that person sweat in a bath for several days. 
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And then command him to shave his head, and cauterize that spot with a cautery at the middle of the head; and then cauterize that area with two cauteries on both temples if it is the beginning of water flowing from both eyes, or from one side if it is the start of water coming from one eye.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	And with the cautery, incise all the veins and arteries that are below the chin; and place the cauteries at that length along the width of the temples. 
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And be careful of blood flows when it is being cauterized; and if you see any blood flow, stop it with some medicine, which is possible for you.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And I will come with wisdom, which is in the extraction of arteries and the cutting of them and the caution of blood flows.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And sometimes it is cauterized on the head between two bones with two cauterizations performed subsequently.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	On the cauterization of old tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears of the eyes are old and persistent and travel through the veins and arteries that are visible on the outer part of the head, and it is confirmed that this is due to cold excess phlegmatic humors, then cauterize that area using a cautery as described in the chapter on the beginning of water falling into the eyes, and with a cautery at the middle of the head, and with two cauterizations between the temples, and with two cauterizations between the bones of the forehead.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you need to perform additional treatment, then cauterize the entire side of the thigh near the end of the eyebrow using a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	The text appears to be in an old Romance language, likely
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	Regarding the translation of "De cauterizacio de fetor de nas," it seems to describe a medical
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat that illness with what we have said in the division and your treatment does not improve the condition, then prepare and give the patient to drink decoctions for three nights; and then shave the head of the patient, and cauterize the affected area with a medium hot iron using olive oil.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then cauterize that area with a clove cautery using two cauteries on both eyebrows, leaving the hairs a little bit.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And be careful with the artery so that you do not burn it.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And regarding the clove cautery, this is its form.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On the cautery for softening the eyelids of wounds.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the eye is softened due to illness or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery, using this lunar cautery; and this is its form:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you, cauterize that above both eyebrows with two small cauteries in every part, and let them be extended from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but rather to the extent that a third part of the eyelid is adhered.
Capitol .xvi.	The text provided seems to be an excerpt from a
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	When the hairs inside the eyelid turn inward and scratch the eye, use a cautery on the eyelid.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hairs of the eyelid turn inward so that they scratch the eye, a cautery can be applied in two ways: either with iron or with combustible medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If using a hot cautery, instruct the patient before the procedure to pull out their hairs as they would when cleansing them, extending and straightening them; and if they scratch due to their growth, then hold the eyelids with a bandage so that they are not disturbed until the hairs have grown back.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	When the hairs have grown back and are straight, then place the head of the patient on your lap, and then apply a mark on the eyelids with a needle, in the shape of a leaf of marta, with the beginning of the mark close to the hairs. 
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And then place some cloth soaked in egg white or in a paste of flour on the wound.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And then heat the cautery, which has this form.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And then cauterize over the figure which you have marked, little by little, in white spots, until the surface of the chain, which is like a myrtle leaf, appears completely burnt properly.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And the sign of health in your work is that you see the eyelid of the wound already contracted and the hairs standing up from the puncture of the wound.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And then raise your hand and leave it for three days, and then place cloth over it with butter until the scab is healed.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if any cause returns through the hairs near their root and the eyelid is softened, then apply the cautery again over that area just as you did initially.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	And if the hairs are on the eyelid, then cauterize that area so it is raised to its natural position and smoothed out, ensuring that the hairs do not irritate the eye.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And the cautery with combustible medicine commands the patient to pluck the hairs so that they are extended and smoothed out, and then a form like a miter leaf should be made from linen paper.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And then take soap known and fresh ashes amounting to an ounce or so, and mix those ingredients well, making it into a poultice so that it is not cooled; then spread this over the paper which has been made in the shape of a miter leaf, and place this on one eye or both; and let the eye be soaked in egg white, and the patient's head should be covered with your hand.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And place your finger on the medicine and press it slightly without crushing it until the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for the bite is like that of fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And when the patient feels the intense bite, then release the medicine and remove it with your hand; once the bite subsides, remove the medicine and wash the eye with water; then check if the eyelid has been lifted as it should be, and if so, clean the constriction with fire or incision, for it is now good; but if not, return to applying the medicine on the area where it did not adhere properly until your operation is smoothed out and the eye contracts.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then place over the wound a bandage to ensure that the bond of adherence is eradicated, and then treat it with an unguent or another substance so that it may be healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you to perform your operation with vigilant diligence so that no medicine falls into the eye. If, over several days, the eyelid becomes softened and any of the hairs begin to poke into the eye, then reapply your medicine to the area where the eyelid has become softened, just as you did at the beginning, and then surround it with a substance so that it may be healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the form of the mithra leaf. 
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And know that the veins of men are diversified according to magnitude and smallness, and therefore accordingly is your treatment devised.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And do not hide the path to treatment from one who studies this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On the cautery of a fistula that is in the lacrimal duct of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula as we have described in the sections on diseases and your treatment does not succeed, then you must cauterize it according to this method: command the patient to rest their head on your shoulder, and hold the head of the patient between your hands in such a way that it is neither pressed nor moved with your head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then place a cloth infused with egg white or a paste of flour on the eye of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then heat the cautery, which has the following form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which should be hollow, like the shape of a reed or a vulture's quill, at one end where the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you want, penetrate into the other extremity. 
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want it to be done in this manner, do as follows.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	However, that which is concave is better for the task at hand.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	Then press the fistula if it is open, draw out the pus, and dry that area.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	Then place the well-ignited cautery over it, and hold it in such a way that your hand slightly moves the cautery towards the nostril opening, so that your hand does not tremble or disturb the patient, and then place the cautery on the edge of the nostril and burn that area.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And if at the beginning of your cautery you penetrate into the bone, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice as needed; and leave it like this for three days, and then place a bandage over the wound and surround it with a drying ointment until it heals.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	However, if ten days have passed and it has not healed, then apply a sharp corrosive medicine over it until the bone is revealed and is scraped as you deem appropriate in its particular case.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And here is the translation line by line:
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cauterization and treatment, that is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer a probe through the nose and reduce the fistula into the body of the nose according to where it will come to its proper place.
Capitol .xviii.	It seems like you've provided a chapter or section heading,
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On the cauterization of the tear in the pouch.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Motash veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, when you treat those cracks using what we have said in the sections and if your cure does not succeed, then apply a small knife-cautery according to this form that is shown:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And let the cavity be adjusted according to the delicacy of that area.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then place that heated instrument carefully into those cracks so that the cautery reaches the edge of the cracks.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	Then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On the cauterization of a fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When an abscess develops at the root of the uvula or on the palate or at the roots of the teeth, and it then swells, and subsequently bursts, and becomes old, with pus flowing out and a fistula forming, if you treat it and it does not improve towards healing, then you must burn a cautery according to the size received in the fistula. Then place that heated cautery into the tract of the fistula, holding your hand so that the hot iron reaches the edge of it; this is done once or twice at the end. Then treat it with what we have mentioned for healing until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And so if the wound is separated and healed, that's good; but if not, it is then necessary to uncover the area and remove the corrupted bone according to what will be detailed in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	And so if the wound is separated and
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On cautery of teeth and on softening of veins.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the arteries are softened by moisture and the teeth are painful, and you treat those with medicines but without success, then place the head of the patient on your knee, and then ignite the cautery which will come close to this, in such a way that you place the quill over the tooth and quickly insert the ignited cautery into it, and keep your hand slightly inside so that the patient feels the heat of the fire reach the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	Then remove your hand, and then repeat the cautery several times as you wish.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	Then the patient should rinse his mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, and afterwards spit it out, for the painful tooth is stopped, the softened gum is strengthened, and the corrupted moisture is dried.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On the cautery for toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is due to cold, or if it is dry or inflamed, or if you do not succeed in curing it with medicine, then apply cautery in two ways: either use a burnt cow's horn or apply heat with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Using the provided guide for translation style and context:
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then repeat that several times until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you want, soak wool or cloth in the aforementioned solution, and place that on the painful tooth, then place a heated iron over it until the heat reaches the core of the tooth's cavity.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, when cauterizing with fire, you should pay attention to the thickness of the reed or iron, and it should be somewhat blunt so that the sharpness of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	Then heat the cautery tool to the desired form, and place it on the tooth while holding your hand until the cautery is cooled; do this several times as long as the pain persists, whether on that day or the next day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And it is necessary that, before applying the cautery, the patient fills their mouth with a good solution and holds it for an hour, then rinses it out. This is the form of the cautery application.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	Cauterize whichever extremity you choose according to what is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the form of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	Capitol .xxii.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	Of the cauterization of extrophy.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When the abscesses are due to phlegm and cold humors and do not respond to digestion through medicines, and you wish to digest those lightly, then you burn the cautery with a shape like this one following, having two hooked ends so that smoke can come out of the cautery from the other end, and place that ignited cautery once upon the abscess, and repeat if necessary until it reaches the core of the abscess.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the abscess is small, then place the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and then leave it for three days and place it over the cut covered in ointment until what the fire has burned is removed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	Then treat it with ointment, bandages, and cloths until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the shape of the cannula or cautery for this purpose is as follows.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On the cautery for hoarseness of voice and constriction of the windpipe.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When the humidities come upon the bronchus of the lung, and especially when this is due to cold composition, then it is necessary that the patient be purged at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize the area by shaving the skin around the earlobe. 
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And be careful not to penetrate too deeply with the cautery into the groin, nor burn more of the tendon than necessary.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize that area with another cautery at the joint of the neck at the last vertebra of the patient.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And the cautery should be applied in the manner previously described.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Then treat that area with what is mentioned until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On the cauterization for lung disease and cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung disease are caused by infiltrating humors and the patient does not have fever or consumption and the illness is old, then cauterize that area with two cauteries on the collarbone at the places where the arteries and veins are; and with another cautery in the middle of the foot between the two mounds; and apply the cautery as described previously.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, perform your cauterization with a punctual cautery, the form of which is described previously in the section on ear pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And let points be made between those places; then treat that area with whatever method is necessary until it is healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And already the cautery has three edges with which the cautery is performed in this way: with one application, you can make three cauteries according to this form.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On the cautery of titillic, which is the top of the aid (likely referring to a specific part of the body or a medical condition).
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the joint is dislocated due to slippery humidities and not fixed at the time of its return, you should locate the dislocation before it returns to its usual position. Then, with a slight movement, it can be relocated as we have testified. First, reduce the dislocation, then lay the patient on their back or on their side. Next, lift the tendon that is inside the capitulum (the head of the bone) upwards using the fingers of your left hand if the joint is dislocated towards the interior.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then heat the cautery that has two ends; this is its form:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the wound so that it penetrates from one side to the other; and the figure of the cautery will come with four-pointed cauteries.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And thus that which is subtle should be applied according to the amount tested; and this is its form:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And sometimes it is adjusted according to this count, and for that reason there are eight cauteries.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	Then place ground and salted pig's fat over the cautery, then ensure the patient rests calmly, and do not move the limb for some time until it is healed.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is above and this needs to be done, then cauterize over the muscle with a claw cautery or multiple pointed cauteries, for the joint is confirmed, humidity is reduced, and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On the cauterization of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When cold and various humidities come into the stomach, causing it to exceed its natural composition and multiply phlegm in it, if you continue with the methods of treatment without confirming [the condition], then the patient must lie on their back, extend their arms and legs, and then cauterize that area with three cauteries: place one cautery under the feet for the length of a finger using a claw cautery, and with two other cauteries on both sides of the first cautery so that the shape of the cauteries forms a triangle; ensure there is enough space between them to prevent excessive burning.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is about two-thirds of the thickness of the chain.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And the shape of the cautery is according to this form with this addition: And if you want, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle part of the stomach according to this form; and this should be a cautery in the shape of a circle according to this form.
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And the stomach should be cauterized punctually for those who are frightened by this cautery: and it is that you place on the stomach points according to the quantity you wish with a probe, and then cauterize those points with a cautery; and then treat it with the treatment that precedes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	On the cauterization of cold feet.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When pain in the feet occurs due to cold, moisture, or excessive wind that has been expelled from its normal composition through excessive excretion, and if the patient is not relieved by the treatment we have mentioned, then it is necessary for the patient to lie supine on their back. Place three cauteries with a probe according to this form and in this quantity above the feet below the hypochondria, taking into account the position of the body when lying down.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of the finger, and let the cautery be according to the length of the body straight.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not move the cautery with your hand.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the quantity that is added equals half the specific amount of the chain, and it is not adjusted further; and if the patient is standing on their feet; and if not standing, then let them lie down, with their limbs already extended, and raise their arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is possible for you to cauterize these areas with a knife cautery, when you apply subtlety and prudence in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And be careful not to proceed too much in the cauterization, and let the specific amount of the entire chain be added so that the whole body is affected and penetrates into the intestines, for the chain here is subtle; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	Of the puncturing of an abscess in the armpit with a cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When there is an inflammation or abscess in the armpit and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the armpit or in the skin, then if it is in the flesh of the armpit, the patient will experience heaviness and increased pain.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the skin of the armpit, then the pain is very intense and often even exhausts the doctors treating it.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, the patient should be turned over onto their side; then expose the area of the abscess with a probe; then heat the cautery which is shaped like a rod, the form of which was described on the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize with that same cautery until all the pus is drained, until it reaches the core, until it no longer produces pus.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it as you would treat other abscesses until it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And this form of cautery should only be used by those whose study in the art of medicine is prolonged, and who have knowledge of many diseases; however, one may sometimes dare to attempt this operation with experience, but it is better to leave it to those who are skilled.
Capitol .xxix.	The given text appears to be from an ancient medical
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	Regarding the cautery of pleurisy.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then immerse it in oil and heat it over the fire, and then cauterize with a cautery at that location which is between the continuation of the collarbone and the neck; and with two small cauteries guide them, slightly inclining towards the part below the chin, and with two cauteries on that which declines between the fifth rib and the spine, slightly declining towards the parts behind; and with another cautery in the middle of the foot; and with another on the stomach, and with three cauteries on the parts behind; and with one cautery at that location which is between the two shoulders, and with two cauteries from both sides of the foot, leaving the cautery which is between the two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And you do not need to apply the cautery with your bare hand, but rather on the surface of the chain in operation. 
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And already the ancients said that some of these men who use an iron cautery resembling a ray and heat it up, and place it in that spot which is between the ribs, until they achieve with this a reduction of the swelling and cleansed pus, just as we have mentioned regarding the swelling of the liver.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	And in this perforation with cautery there is no need for fear, because one dies so soon after you perform it at the site of the fistula which cannot be healed.
Capitol .xxx.	The text you provided appears to be in
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Here is the translation of the given line:
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat the illness of the throat with what we have said about the treatment in the division and if your treatment does not work, then apply a cautery to it in three ways, all of which are correct. One of these is that you make three or four linear cauteries along the length of the throat according to the shape of the cauteries for the spleen, whose shape has been mentioned previously.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And there should be the thickness of a finger or a bit more between each cautery, and the method of the cautery should be the same method we have described for the cauterization of the spleen.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not touch the cautery with your hand; and the patient should be lying on his back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And there is another method of cauterization, which involves heating the cautery with two flames, a technique we have mentioned in the chapter on muscle dislocation, and lifting the bandage that is along the side of the thigh where the patient's left side lies.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And let your elevation, with which you lift the bandage according to the length of the body, be such that cauteries can be made according to the width of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	Then insert the two burning points into that area where you will penetrate the bandage from the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	Then remove the cautery; and thus four cauteries have been made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you wish, cauterize using a cautery with three burning points.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	Then you should care for the cautery after it has rested and stopped burning for several days, because it is more beneficial than other preceding causes in the healing process.
Capitol .xxxi.	Capitol .xxxi.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	Of the cauterization of dropsy.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you treat the dropsy with the methods of cure that we have mentioned in the division and do not achieve your treatment, then it is necessary to apply cautery with four cauters around the navel, one cautery on the stomach, another cautery on the liver, another cautery on the spleen, two cauters between the vertebrae of the back, one cautery at the center of the foot, and another cautery on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the depth of the cautery should be proportional to the severity of the condition.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	Then leave the cautery open so that it burns for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the patient through the cautery in such a way that two intentional wounds are added to him, and let healing come quickly to him with the help of remedies.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery with which the abdomen is cauterized should be like a key, according to the form described previously, and the shape of the cautery with which the back is cauterized should be like an olive, according to its previously described form.
Capitol .xxxii.	Capitol .xxxii.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	Of cautery of feet and of the thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are inflamed with dropsy and filled with watery fluid, you must cauterize the feet on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger, lift your hand with the cautery and do not twist it; then raise your hand, and do not return it entirely, because the watery fluid will ooze out.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The cautery is made in this form: Then make two cauteries on both thighs, and on each thigh a cautery should be made with the blade end of the knife-like cautery.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And the cautery should be according to the length of the thigh: place one at the top and the other at the middle of the thigh; and on each thigh, two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And leave the wound open for a long time so that some fluid may ooze out of it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	Then treat it with those causes which we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On the cautery of the abdominal area.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the belly is weakened by cold and moisture inside, which weakens its virtues, it is the digestive and retentive virtue, which are in the stomach and intestines, and this is treated with methods of healing and not by agreeing with it, and sometimes patients undergo cautery to exhibit those virtues; then cauterize that area with a large cautery on their stomach according to the previous cauterization of the stomach, using the circular cautery and four small cauteries around the subtle umbilicus, with a fine nail-shaped cautery; and with a cautery over the navel, either large ones or two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if you have excessive moisture and the patient tolerates it, then cauterize that area on the spleen and on the intestines, and strengthen them by placing two cauteries over the stomach and near the groin, for this is a perfect healing of youth from which you do not err.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On the cautery of ancient hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When there are ancient hemorrhoids in the natural region of the anus, caused by thick cold humors or corrupted moisture, and they are treated with what we have said in the division and not by agreeing with your own cure, then cauterize them with three cauteries on the pus near the small vertebrae and a small triangular area, and with a cautery above the navel, placed by two fingers.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you suspect that the stomach of the patient is chilled and the food in it not digested, and their face often becomes inflamed, then cauterize that area on the stomach with a large cautery as previously mentioned; and with one cautery on the spleen, and with another cautery on their liver using a claw cautery, leave the cautery open for some time, and then treat internally so that it may heal.
Capitol .xxxv.	It seems like you've provided a section heading,
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	Here is the translation of the given text:
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you cut the tendon, then you apply the cautery that resembles a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then insert the heated cautery into the cut tendon, and continue until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood comes.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do this once or twice, for if there are too many of them, then cauterize each one as we have described, and then treat them with ointments until they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery on any area, it is more harmful to healing.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XXXVI.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	On the cauterization of fistulas that are naturally harmful in those areas.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the treatment we have recommended in its proper place, and the patient is frightened by it, then heal them with a cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when someone has a fistula that is naturally harmful and is old, it discharges pus and corrupted humidity. In this case, what is most appropriate is to probe it with a fine needle, and then determine the depth of it with the previously mentioned needle.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	And ignite the cautery which resembles a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	Then place the ignited cautery into this fistula, and according to the amount it enters, gauge it.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeat the application of the cautery inside until those corrupted parts of the body are thoroughly burned once or twice or three times, according to your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And be careful not to burn the nerves and veins; or if the fistula extends to the body of the bladder or the intestine, then be cautious around all those areas; and do not perform this unless the fistula is in a fleshy area and you believe it is not penetrating further.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Then treat the inner area until it heals.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the area is sealed and the materials are separated from it, and remain that way for a long time, then know that it is already completely healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the materials are not removed from it, then know that it is penetrating either into the area around the corrupted bone or that this comes from those causes which will bring about recurrence in its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Capitol .xxxvii.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	Of the cauterization of the hemorrhoids.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When pain in the hemorrhoids is caused by cold or excessive wind (gas), and because of this, the patient's life is troubled, then it is necessary to cauterize that area on the hemorrhoids with a cautery, applying a nail-shaped cautery specifically for each hemorrhoid.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And forcefully cauterize them with the second one slightly apart, so that three linear cauteries will result, and thus they will be more effective in treatment.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On the cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When you encounter weakness and softening of the bladder due to cold and humidity such that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize that area slightly above the bladder, where the pubic hairs begin. Cauterize with one cautery on the right side and another on the left side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the number of the patient's fingers; and cauterize that area with a cautery on the lower part of the back, or with two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And let the cautery be in the shape of a claw as it is processed. 
Capitol .xxxix.	Capitol .xxxix.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Of the cauterization of the thigh.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When cold and moisture come to the thigh, and because of this impregnation is prohibited, and the menstruation of women is corrupted, and the provocation of it is delayed, and there happens pain due to the absence of their flow, then the area should be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder; and with a cautery above the pubic region or with two cauteries, and let the cautery be a clavilh.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter XL.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When cold and moist humors are infused into the area of the ankle, and they cause it to slip out of its place, a sign of this is that one leg appears lengthened compared to the other when they are compared.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the site of the dislocation is found where there is pain.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then it is necessary to cauterize the patient on the area of the ankle with a circular cautery, after you have marked it with your fingers around the joint as it has rotated, so that the joint falls in the center of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And here is the translation of the provided sentence:
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize it with three large olive wood cauters.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And let the cautery be done according to the extent of the spread of the entire chain; then treat that area so that it may heal.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XLII.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	Of the cautery of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain comes to the upper part of the body and is caused by cold and moisture, the patient is treated as we have said and not otherwise, which is old-fashioned. Now it is necessary that you purge the patient of thick humors with foul pills or artificial pills or similar ones; then cauterize that area.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the method of cautery in this case is according to two methods: either cautery with burning medicines, or cautery with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	It follows two known methods, one of which is to cauterize that area on the wide part with three triangular cauteries in this form; and make a good depth with those.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And the space between each cautery should be the quantity of the thickness of a finger, and the cautery should be olive or grain-shaped.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	At other times, the cautery should be placed on the exact spot at the head of the ankle, making four cauteries.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, cauterize with a circle, which precedes the form in the cautery of the dislocation of the ankle, such that the circle encloses and burns the entire length of the tendon.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the method of cautery for gout when pain is attached to the ankle and does not extend into the thigh.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	But if it extends into the thigh, then cauterize that area with two cauteries on the thigh at the spot where you ask the patient where the pain is; and with one cautery on the calf, about four fingers away from the outer part.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cautery is knife-like, and the depth of the cautery should be according to the degree of the protrusion of the chain.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the patient tells you that the pain is spreading around the area near the toes of the feet, then cauterize that area where they indicate with a cautery using three points or four or more if necessary from there.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the patient tells you that the pain extends from the ankle to the thigh, then cauterize that area using a knife-shaped cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And be careful in any cauterization that you do not use the cautery so much that you burn nerves or large arteries, and by doing so, you may harm the patient or cause contraction.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have seen some of those who cauterized over the ankle and continued with the cauterization to such an extent that the burning inflammation spread until it reached the foot, and the heat penetrated and corrupted the entire foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	Then administer a strong purge for the stomach, and do this before death occurs.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two separate areas, cauterize each one according to this method.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise have also said something about the cauterization with such a cautery, of which this is the manner: make a circle of iron whose circumference is half a palm; and let its hole be according to the thickness of a date seed or less by a little.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And within that circle there should be another third [circle]; and the space between them should be the quantity of a pigeon's nail; and those circles should be opened on two sides; and the length of those rods should be one or two nails, and make on those iron edges properly arranged in the circles; and this is its form:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	And it should be ignited in the fire until it reddens and sparks, and then it should be placed on the part of the ankle, with the patient lying on their side.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And therefore, cauterize that area with three round cauteries at once.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then leave it for three days; then apply a plaster to that area and keep the wound open for several days; then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Dyeys Albucasis says: oh, sons, of this kind of cautery we have used little due to the fear of its appearance, and because few have found it worthy of study.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	But for those who have suffered well from it, apply it to the affected area with this cautery.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	But for cautery with adhering medicines, you should make two circles using a perforated armula similar to the keyhole of an iron door; the length of the walls should be about two nuts or keys in size.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space between each of these is equal to the thickness of a finger; and they should be placed below and above, and they should contain each other in this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And then place your hand over the part of the ankle while the patient lies on their side, and press your hand firmly on the part of the ankle; and then take warm water and pour it between two circles, and let the quality of that be near the fire little by little, and keep that for about an hour, and have the patient endure the burning and adjustment — because that method causes a burning similar to fire — until the burning ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then lift your hand with the instrument and clean the warm water off the entire ankle with cool water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then let it rest for three days and place a bandage over it until the blackness from the burning is gone, and leave it like that for several more days, and the pus will flow out; this is the final step in healing.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain is spread in the thigh or the abdomen, apply the same treatment as was done for the ankle, using water accordingly.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the method of hot water, and I have already written about that in the treatise on the refinement of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Take an equal part of alkali and unextinguished ashes (likely meaning unslaked lime), grind them together, and place them in a new vessel, one part of which should be pierced with a small hole according to the amount that can enter it. 
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And place the bottom of the ulcer or inflamed area on top of the alkali and pour over it lukewarm water that reaches your finger, and then compress those areas with your hand for good pressure, and let the sharp water that descends from it flow onto the part of the ulcerated area.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then collect all that water and pour it over another fresh alkali, renewing the process, because at this point there will be a strong acuity, which is administered in many medical procedures and in the cauterization of other limbs, as this operation involves fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And among the medicines with which a broad cauterization is performed, there are such as bitumen and anaean honey mixed with soap in this way.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Gaulus recounts an operation and cure used by one of the ancients to treat pain in the ankle and sciatic vein, praising it highly, saying that no other treatment is necessary, and that it cures completely as he recommends, for if you immerse that injury in a bath, you are already healed of it.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it is that wormwood should be taken, and if wormwood cannot be found, a fresh fig should be used; it should be crushed with a little grease and placed on the ankle where there is pain, or on the thigh, or on the groin, and it should be bandaged.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And it should be left for a duration of three hours or for the amount of time that the patient feels relief from the treatment.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then place him in a bath and when his body is warmed up, put him in the sun, for the pain ceases and he is healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that it is not necessary for anyone to use cautery with these medicines until the body is evacuated.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	But Escorides says that when the vein is cauterized with a goat's horn, it greatly benefits him; and the cautery should be applied in this second manner: wool should be soaked in old oil and placed between the toes of the foot and the fossil. 
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And then take dried goat's flesh and inflame it with fire until it becomes charcoal; then place it on the wool and spread it out until it is extended.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And then repeat this process, and do not stop until the sensation of the bite reaches the water and the pain subsides. 
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this method of cautery is called cow cautery.
Capitol .xlii.	It seems like you've provided a chapter or section heading from
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On the cautery treatment for foot pain.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	When the pain is in the back for various causes, such as by falling or by impact or by excessive evacuation, and for causes similar to those, due to the infusion of cold and wet matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cautery is only used in this single case which is caused by the effusion of cold matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, after evacuating the patient with bitter pills and similar ones, which are applied on the back where the pain is, draw three lines according to the width of it, and mark ten signs in each line, then apply five cauteries or more, depending on the tolerance of the patient and their strength.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And the cautery should be done with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, cauterize with three or four cauteries using a median claw-shaped cautery in the following manner:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XLIII.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On the application of cautery at the onset of gout.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	This disease often appears in small children; and the sign of its onset in children is that it affects their structure, causing swelling and movement difficulty.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And you will find that the lower vertebrae of the back and neck are beginning to protrude above the other vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And so when you see this and wish to prevent it, then cauterize that area with a circular cautery according to this form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	And take the cautery over all parts of the vertebra equally.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you wish, cauterize around the vertebra with a pointed cautery, two or three lines.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And let the points be close to each other.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	Then treat the area in between so that it heals according to what we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	But be careful not to apply the cautery to swelling caused by nerve spasms.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On the cauterization of gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that penetrate each part of the body, and when pains occur in the feet, doctors typically call this gout properly.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And thus when gout caused by cold is treated with a method of cure and the pains are not alleviated, then they should be treated with cautery.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And it is that you cauterize that area near the evacuation in the circle of the ankle joint with several cauteries.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And it is an olive-shaped cautery, of which this is the form:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains rise into the fingers or other joints, and this often happens, then apply cautery to each finger with three or four burns from all sides using this olive-shaped cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if more cauteries than these are necessary for you, then apply the cautery but do not press your hand too hard with the cautery beforehand; only place it around the size of a chain link.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains rise into the finger and the joint, then apply the cautery that we have described in its respective chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pains are in the muscles only and is called sciatica, then puncture around the circumference of the thighs as it spreads, puncturing along those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pain remains in the toes, then puncture around the circumference of the soles on each toe and on the palm of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pains can approach over several days in the joints or in the muscles, then cauterize them all around with the help of instruments.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not evacuate the patient of good regimen and reception of medicines, for if good regimen is practiced and phlegm is evacuated with this cautery, he will be healed, God helping.
Capitol .xlv.	Capitol .xlv.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	Of the cauterization of wounds.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When a wound occurs in the knees and there is protrusion of intestines before the hernia at the groin, and this begins to happen soon, then you must order the patient to leave their meal for the day and use laxatives so that the discharge comes from their belly.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	Then follow the patient with your hands on their back, and command them to keep their body straight until the hernia or the intestines are expelled or appear.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	Then return and with your tied fingers, gently test the rupture over the bone of the pelvis, signaling the end that resembles half a circle at the lower parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then heat the cautery, which has the following form:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	until it is red hot and gives off sparks.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	And you have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them, another servant is on their chest, and another on their feet, who holds their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And then place the cautery over that mark with your hand, holding the cautery straight, and aim to reach the bone of the pelvis within the middle of the incision; and repeat with that again if you have not succeeded in reaching the bone on the first attempt.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And carefully observe the condition of the intestine during your cautery, so that you do not burn the intestine, which could cause death or another serious harm to the patient.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your operation is not successful.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And it is necessary that the cautery for children be subtle according to their size and proportion.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And then care for the cautery site for three days with ointment until the burn scar is healed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with other unguents until it is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient should lie on their back for forty days until the area is sealed and the plague is healed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And it is necessary to regulate the patient's diet according to the length of their treatment, which reduces their stomach's burden, and to ensure that the intestine does not come out during the healing process.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And then when it is time to remove [the treatment], after forty days, administer a properly made medicine, and let the patient take it for another forty days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And the patient should reduce work and excess food and drink, and loud speaking, for when they follow this regimen of complete healing, they will be healed.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And I will speak of the treatment for ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and at the beginning, if they do not want to remove [the rupture], then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size, and let what is protruding from the wound be about a third of it; then treat that as we have said, and it should not be adjusted.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And already some of the earliest [doctors] have said that rupture should be treated with a triangular cautery according to this form, since it is marked with a tent-like shape:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And a line is placed by you horizontally across the highest part of the rupture, and another line above it; and then place your hand with a needle cautery, but the first cautery should be lighter and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	The text provided appears to be in an archaic
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Regarding the line "De cauterizacio de torcio," here is the translation into
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain occurs in the upper limbs due to a fall or blow and that pain persists for a long time without showing signs of healing with medicines, then it is necessary to treat it with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the cautery should be applied to the entire limb according to its size and smallness, and the strength and weakness of it, and the location of the injury and the pain in it.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Therefore, if it is healed by the first cautery, that is good; and if not, then apply the cautery again to it; for such pains are usually punctured along the limb towards that part of the limb closest to the heart, so you must continue with the cautery until the patient is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter .xlvii.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	From the text provided and the instructions given, it appears that the language is a fabricated medieval
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Those with leprosy often see great benefit from cautery, especially if the type of leprosy is caused by the corruption of flesh and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And when you wish to cauterize the affected area, consider if the leprosy is common and can be cured with what we have said in the division [of treatment], and do not hesitate, nor leave it untreated. Fear that the corruption may spread throughout the patient’s body and all of its composition; therefore, cauterize on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, another slightly below, at the forehead where the hair ends; two more on both temples; and one behind, on the back of the neck or nape.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	Place your hand with the cautery slightly inside so that it presses on the bone, making a small indentation, and remove the scales from there, so that the expiration of thick vapors is alleviated; and cauterize on the nose according to what is necessary.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leprosy has already spread over the patient and appears manifestly, then you must cauterize with those cauteries which we have mentioned for the head; and with a cautery on the tip of the nose, and two cauteries on both cheeks, and two cauteries on the two cervical vertebrae, and six cauteries on the thoracic vertebrae, and one large one on the vertebrae near the hip, and one on the hip itself, and two on the knees, and one on each knee, and two on the elbows, and one on each elbow, and two on the ankles, and one on each ankle; and cauterize over all the joints of his fingers and toes, and on each heel of his feet, and on the armpits.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And be careful of the nerves that are above the ankle so you do not burn those.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And sometimes it is cauterized with a cautery on the bone of the elbow and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the spleen.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more you apply cauteries, the more beneficial and effective it is; and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery, just as they do not from the disease, because their body is already numbed.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And it is necessary that the cauteries be large or few according to the members and joints, depending on the specifications of the instruments.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then treat the cautery with ground iris mixed with honey and with other treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On the Cauterization for Stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When any member is numb or paralyzed and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, but is not healed, then you should cauterize that numbed member with cauteries according to the size of the member or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let your cautery enter the incision of the chain a little.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with an ointment which will help it heal.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And sometimes a cautery is applied to a nerve that extends to the hands and feet, and to the vertebrae of the back, to reveal the course of the nerves which move that limb, and the nerve is then traced.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	But do not presume on this unless one is knowledgeable in the anatomy of the limbs and the distribution of the nerves that move throughout the body.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLIX.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On the cautery of tumors that are malignant.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When a tumor is old and does not respond to any of the ointments of medicine, then you should cauterize it with a cautery, slightly for a short period according to the quantity of the substance of the tumor, until its whiteness and color are traced, and its color is changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with flour of ashes and lentils mixed with olive oil and rose leaves, and with the blood of a dove or the blood of a swallow, each in equal parts and all mixed together. Then apply it to a cloth and place it on the area until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	The line "Capitul .l
De cauterizacio de cranc.	Chapter on cautery of the neck.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer begins and you wish to remove it, then cauterize the area with a circular cautery around it as it has spread.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise have said that it should be cauterized with the latter cautery in the middle of the area; but I do not see this as favorable, for I fear it may become ulcerated, and I have seen this happen several times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is better that it be cauterized around the area with a circular cautery as we have said, or with multiple cauteries.
Capitol .li.	Chapter II.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	On the cauterization of abscesses.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When an abscess is delayed in maturation, and this is due to excess fluid or the condition of the patient, who may be old and frail, with little blood, or because of the season, and you wish to hasten its maturation; then cauterize around it with small pointed cauteries; and after that, leave it so that it will quicken in maturing.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	And if you want the perforation with a cautery, then ignite the cautery which has this form: and place it in the middle of the suitable location so that it penetrates the skin.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery in that place where it is placed alleviates the body of the arm; then care for it until it heals.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter .lii.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	Of corrosive cauterization.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrosive corruption is moving within the limb, which corrupts it just as fire eats dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you find that corrosive substance in a place that can withstand cautery with fire, then you should apply cautery to several small and large areas as appropriate in the location where the corrosion is present.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	Then cautery that area thoroughly until you eliminate all the corrosion and leave no cause for it to remain.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	Then leave it for three days, and place over the cautery sites a dressing made with oil mixed until all the scars are removed and all the corruption is eradicated.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	Then treat it with poultices that promote flesh growth.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	However, if after three days you see that the flesh is growing healthy and there is no corruption, that is good; but if not, then reapply the cautery to the areas that are still corrupted.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And corrosive corruption is sometimes treated with sharp medicines, for those can serve as an alternative to cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, healing with fire cautery is of lesser harm.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already mentioned the treatment of acute medicine in the division, and thus take that which you will find necessary.
Capitol .liii.	Capitol .liii.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	Of the cauterization of claws and other similar parts.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Spots observed in the areas of the foot affected by a condition called "claw," which is a serious, deep wound that deforms the foot; and cautery on these spots can be done in two ways: with fire cautery and with hot water cautery.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then place that ignited cautery on the nail, and then rotate your hand with the cautery around the nail until the cautery reaches the depth of the nail.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And leave that for three days until it begins to sweat out (or exude) from the arm. 
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And then apply a poultice made with crushed wild mallows mixed with salt, and leave the poultice on that area for one night, because it will help to root out its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with an unguent made from generative flesh until it is healed. 
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it does not resolve, and often affects the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, then you must administer these cauterizations with water. You should take a quill made of iron or lead or a feather shaft, and place that on the vein; then pour into the quill a small amount of hot water, and hold it, revolving it with the compression of your hand all around, pressing the edge of the tube against the root of the vein; and the hot water will find its way through the pores at the root of the vein. The patient should endure the biting of the hot water for about an hour, and then remove it, as the vein along with its roots will have been eradicated.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And in this way, one should place them close together so that they cover all those areas where they are within the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And then treat those abscesses where the roots of the claws have been removed using ointments that make the flesh regenerate.
Capitol .liiii.	The given text appears to be a heading or a
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Regarding the cautery of tremors.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When someone suffers from a tremor due to cold in the nerves or from a cold-induced fever, or for some similar reason, then you should apply cautery at four or five points along the vertebrae of the back, placing one cautery between each vertebra; and also apply a cautery on their feet and over their stomach using an olive-shaped cautery.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the tremor of the patient is calmed and hastens the healing of the cold disease.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter LV.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Regarding the cautery of white ailments affecting the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When white spots appear on the body, and there are fissured pustules that are formed from thick corrupted matter; therefore, at the beginning when they first appear, it is necessary to apply cautery over the top of each fistula using a fine cautery with myrtle twigs, the end of which is extended by fire; or with long razor blades; or with lens-shaped cauteries.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And at times, cauterization is also applied at the beginning of its expulsion according to this method; and it is not considered harmful, and the excess is disrupted by doing these things, leading to healing from them.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, it must be done near evacuation with phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Capitol lvi.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Of cautery for accidental blood flow due to artery cutting.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Watched troops where the cut artery causes blood to flow outward from the wound or from the beginning of abscesses or cautery on the limb, and similar cases, and it is difficult to remain there. 
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore, when this happens to someone, then you should press with your hand on the opening of the artery, and place your finger there, squeezing it repeatedly until the flow of blood stops, and that it does not continue.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then place in the fire the small and large olive-shaped cautery tools, many of them, and blow on those among which there are still some that are not yet ignited.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take one of those, small or large, depending on the location and the wound where the artery is ruptured, over that vein pulsing, after you have cleaned your finger, and hold the cautery until it is burned and constrict the bleeding.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you move your finger and remove the cautery, then take another ready-made cautery from those that are prepared in the fire, and continue to do this one after another until the bleeding is stopped.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And be careful not to burn the nerves that are here, and that no other harm comes to the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to stop the bleeding in any other way except by one of four methods: either by cautery as we have mentioned, or by extraction when it cannot be extracted, because when it is extracted, the ends are burned and the bleeding stops, or by binding with a ligature or with strong structure bandages, or by placing medicines on it that have the power to stop the bleeding; and they should be bound tightly with a pad with appropriate compression.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	And here is the translation of the given sentence:
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	And if this happens to someone and the doctor is not present nor medicine, then open with a gentle touch of the index finger on the orifice of that vein as we have said, and apply strong pressure inside so that the blood stops from the main part of the wound, and above the artery the finger should not be removed; and above the artery it should be sprinkled with cold water to freeze and thicken the blood; and moreover, consider where there is a need for cauterization or medicine.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begin the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	About incision and puncture and bloodletting and phlebotomy and wounds and their similarities.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter about all diseases in which cauterization with fire is appropriate and with burning medicine, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for them along with the forms of the cauteries; and I have ordered the chapters from the highest part of the head down to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And I will proceed in this chapter in the same manner, so that the one desiring this may be alleviated, concerning what they have requested.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before I begin this, son, you must learn that in this chapter there is terror regarding what is in the first chapter on cautery.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And for this reason, great caution must be taken, because during the operation described in this chapter, there are many times when blood evacuation occurs, which is through the veins with which life depends on, and so does the spraying of the vein or incision over the abscess or appearance of pus discharge or purification of the wound or extraction of an arrow or cutting of a stone, and similar procedures.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And with all of these is accompanied fear and trembling, and in most cases, death follows.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that this should not happen to you in which there is danger, for sometimes your ways as a person can be mixed with the manners of diseases. 
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And of them, some will depart with their illness and it is light but leads to death, and this because of the intensity of what they find in their illness, and due to the duration of their sickness, and with the illness comes fear which signifies death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And of those is the one who gives you his possessions and says, you hoping with that person for health, and their illness is perilous.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore you must not consent to anyone who comes to you in this manner; and your caution should be greater than your covetousness and greed; and do not presume any cause about this without certain knowledge that confirms what you owe, and through which praiseworthy success follows.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And it is used in the cure of all your illnesses for prognosis and indication to which health is restored, for in that lies your help towards acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	O, sons, may God inspire in you His understanding and not withdraw direction and protection from you, for this is in His hands.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have ordered this chapter separately into sections following the chapter on cautery, concerning the treatment from head to foot, so that it may ease for you what you seek and of which you have need.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	On the treatment of water that is contained in the head of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this illness often occurs due to childbirth and when the nurse tightens the head of the child too forcefully.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And sometimes it occurs due to a hidden cause that is not known.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	But I have only seen this illness in children; and in all those cases, death followed closely, and thus it seems to me a fatal condition for them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and the head of the child was always so enlarged that he could not bear it himself due to the size of his head, and the humidity increased until death.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this humidity is either added between the tendon and the bone, or it is added under the bone on the spine.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	For the operation in which if the humidity is between the tendon and the bone and the abscess is small, then you must split at the middle of the head with a cut horizontally, and let the length of the cut be about two fingers wide so that the moisture can flow out, and this is the form of the spatula:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And therefore, if humidity is increased and the abscess is larger, then there are two incisions according to this method:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the humidity is near the bone, the sign of it is that you see the corners of the head open in all parts and water is squeezed out when you press that area with your hand on the inner parts and this was not previously hidden from you. 
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	You must cut in the middle of the head with three incisions according to this manner:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And then extract all the moisture from the incision; and then strengthen the incisions with cloths and bandages; and then fumigate it with wine and oil for up to five days, and then remove the dressing and treat the wound with lint and ointments, and bind the head evenly; and feed the patient with dry food of little moisture until the member is strengthened and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another method of incision, which considers the size of the abscess and the collection of water, for sometimes it is more pronounced in the occiput, or in the front part, or on the right side, or on the left side; and therefore pay attention with the incision to where the abscess and the accumulation of water appear, and do this according to what is best possible for you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And be careful not to cut the artery, so that blood does not flow and the patient does not die from that blood flow due to the evacuation of moisture.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter II.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	From the incision of the arteries that are near the ears, called helixes.
Capitol segon.	Second chapter.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When catarrh or rheumatism occurs in the eyes or foot, and it is chronic, and you do not find healing through medicines, then the final cure in this case is to begin with those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And therefore when you want to incise those in whom the patient shaves his own head, and then rub the area with a rough cloth so that the veins appear, and then secure the neck of the patient with some cloth; and then consider where the vein pulses; and the places of each over the places which are pressed near the ears, and thus they remain hidden in some men.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then mark over the artery with a probe, and then incise each one with a sharp spatula from each acute part until it reaches within the bone, and this should be done according to the width of the head. 
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you want, insert the spatula below the artery and break it at the points above.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And the length of the incision should be about two fingers wide, for when any vein is cut open, blood comes out with a pulsating flow, which spurts out frequently.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	If the artery does not appear at the incision site, then you must measure from the earlobe a distance of three fingers, and then mark it with a probe, and go into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And what needs to be let out of the blood is a quantity of wine uncii (ounces), and it strongly depends on whether more or less is let, and all of this is according to the amount that appears from the strength of the patient and the fullness of their artery.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then examine the wound, and if any source of pus remains on the bone, then remove it to prevent an abscess from forming.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen the wound with poultices and liniments of linen cloth, and then treat it with ointments until it heals.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	On the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When someone suffers from chronic migraines or sharp headaches due to moisture and qualities in the veins of the temples, or when these are strong and similar to those conditions, and treatment with medical methods does not help, then we resort to extracting the arteries in the temples for these illnesses, or cauterizing them as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the method of the operation and extraction is that the patient shaves the hairs which are on the temples; and understand the artery visible in the temple where it is shown to you by its pulse, and it is hidden only in few men due to the intensity of cold.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is obscured from you, then the neck of the patient should be pulled tight with some cloth; and then rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with warm water until the artery becomes clearly visible to you.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And now you take the spatula, which has the following form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you carefully scrape the vein with that instrument until you reach the artery; and then insert it in there and extract it from the superior parts until you remove it from the vein and expose it from the tunics which are left behind, from all sides.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the artery is delicate, then wrap it with the tip of a needle, and then divide it partially according to the amount by which its ends are elongated and contracted, and there will be no flow of blood, because if they are not divided, the blood will not flow out completely.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then evacuate one to three uncii of blood.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, then you must tie it in two places with a strong double thread of silk or with long cords, and do not worry about putrefaction before the wound heals and the blood flow stops.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then cut away the excess that is between two ligaments; and do this at that time or another appropriate time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you want, cauterize that area with a cautery between the bone using a knife-shaped cautery before the ends of it are cut, and it will remain in place for the same procedure.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better to do this when the patient does not have fever or is of a hot temperament; for cautery is one of those causes that helps the final drying of humors, and thus it is better in treatment.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And after the extraction of the arteries, one should fill the place with an old plug, and it should be placed over the area properly treated with powder, and then it should be cured with drying medicines that promote flesh growth and with bandages until it is healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while you are working another time blood flows from the artery, then you must act to stop that bleeding, either by using a cautery or by filling the area with a plug, and hold your hand until the bleeding is stopped.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if none of those causes are present for you, then place your finger on the spot where the blood is congealing, and splash the area with water of intense cold until the sharp pain subsides, and be strong as needed.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And what is lighter in the extraction of artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two knives, since you have marked the two spots with a probe, and afterwards, some moments, with fire ignited, enter until they reach the bone and divide the vein into two places so that what is between its extremities is elongated, because it is not consolidated entirely with this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And let the sharpness of both knives be tested.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, if there is less sharpness than two knives would provide, it is better to use them, because they are as sharp as two knives near each cut, and do not tear the flesh with speed. 
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, when there is some swelling in those areas, the heat of the fire is applied to them and the flesh is cut slightly.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better than all other works and lighter. 
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And let the space which is between two ribs be the quantity of the thickness of a finger.
Capitol quart.	Chapter four.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	On the treatment of acute and acidic tearful eyes.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the tears are acidic, and it is due to the veins that are on top of the head being distended, and if you find no other cause for medical treatment, sometimes the face of the patient turns red, and they feel a crawling sensation in their forehead as if ants were crawling there, and their eyes become weakened to such an extent that the eyelashes are noticeable, and the eyelids are irritated by the sharpness of the tears. Ancient bitter mixtures were used in the treatment of these conditions, and I do not disdain this method of treatment. 
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And you command the patient to part the hairs on their forehead, and then make three incisions in the forehead equally spaced according to its length.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the incision is two fingers: the first incision should be equally distant from the length of the nose at the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length a little beyond the movement of the eyelashes which are in the lacrimal area, and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And be careful of the beginning of the arteries that are on both sides, and extend your hand from the continuation of both jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space between each incision is the quantity of three fingers apart.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a piece of sponge prepared or dry cloths with which you can dry the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then insert a spatula with two sharp ends, which is the shape for this incision:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	which is to separate the temples into the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Here is the translation line by line:
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then stretch the spatula and insert it into the first incision again using another instrument which is called a cutter, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And place the side of that sharp instrument against the attached flesh and the side towards the bone, and push that inside until it reaches the middle crack, and cut with that all the vessels descending from the head to the heels.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	And if the incision is to be continued to this part of the chain, then do so in the middle fissure between the other fissures.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And since an equal amount of blood flows out, press the areas where the clotted blood is located.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then apply an equal amount of old fat to each crack, and place on it the powder mixed with wine and oil and good vinegar, ensuring that it does not develop an abscess.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day, remove the bandage and administer a strong infusion of hot or warm water, and then treat it with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil and other ingredients until the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	On the treatment of tears through catharsis and the descent of fluids from within the head compartments.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When good and continuous catharsis occurs, and at times the fluids of the patient are slightly weakened, and their vision is already impaired, and the eyelids are ulcerated as well as the area around the eyes, and there is acute pain in the forehead accompanied by sneezing, you should know from these symptoms that the materials and catharsis do not come but from small veins within the compartments of the head.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure for these is this: command the patient to shave their forehead, and then make an incision in that area at the midpoint of the forehead, a small one in width (and begin with the cut from the left temple towards the right temple; and this incision should go into the bone; and move your hand away from the corners of the temples which are swollen due to chewing), until the bone is exposed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	And dry all the blood with a sponge or a dry cloth, and then pack between the two edges of the incision with old wool or cloths.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then apply powdered material imbued with wine and oil on top to prevent an inflammatory swelling from forming.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you remove that and see that the swelling has diminished, then you must scrape the bone until new flesh begins to grow, and then treat it with a drying regimen which promotes flesh growth, as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix them together, and make a plaster out of them, which is applied to these areas where new flesh is growing.
Capitol .vi.	Capitol .vi.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	Regarding the treatment of what falls into the ears:
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	Every cause that affects the ears is of four kinds: either it is a mineral stone or something similar to a stone such as iron and glass, or it is from plants like sesame or bean, or it is a fluid cause like water and sour wine and things similar to them, or some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And so when a stone enters the ear or another cause similar to those causes that do not fit or grow in the ear, and expose the ear to sunlight, and if you remove the stone, then distill some of these causes with violet oil or sizami (a type of distilled water), and then administer its extract, and make them sneeze with condizi (a substance used to induce sneezing), and plug the nostrils before the act of sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then place some pieces of cloth or wool around the ear's opening, and stretch the ear upward in parts, because it is commonly believed that this method helps with these kinds of issues. 
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not expelled, then administer extraction from them using the instrument called subtle epicyclic grasper of which this is the form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is expelled by movement, that is good; and if not, then administer the extraction of it with a slender probe of double curvature.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And therefore, if it is not caused by this, then make a tube of iron and insert the end of the tube into the ear canal, and seal around the tube with wax and softened oil so that nothing is open except the tube.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	Then extract with your breath with strong suction, because it involves the same steps as we have described.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	But if it is not extracted in this manner, then take some ground alum or an old prepared device with which birds are caught in small quantities, and place that at the end of the tube, and then wrap something decently over it.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	Then insert that into the ear canal easily, and then dry the ear of its moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And therefore, if it is not extracted by all the methods we have described, then you should consider incising that area before it develops into an abscess or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the method of incising that area is to first let blood from the patient's saphenous vein and extract blood according to the virtue of the patient, then make a cut between your fingers and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the tip of the ear, drawing out the pus from the deeply pressed area.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And if the crack of lunar shape reaches the stone, and once the stone is found, remove it with appropriate instruments; then immediately close the crack quickly at that time, and care for it until it is healed.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause in the ear is one of the growths that swell up, then administer its treatment and extraction; but if it does not yield to this method, then take a thin, subtle spatula according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and use it to cut out the growth that has occurred in the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not perform this when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor from the ear. Place it in small pieces and then extract them using your fingers or a subtle gesture, or with an incision as we have said, because this makes the extraction easier.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	However, when water has entered the ear, the patient should start with a sneeze under certain conditions, and fill their ear with some old cloth, then jump on the ear where the water is. If it is thus expelled, that's good; if not, take thin stone rods according to the length of a finger, heat them slightly over fire, and have the patient insert one into the canal of their ear and jump slightly from that side while tapping another stone against the stone inside the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Therefore, do not stop until all the water has been thoroughly drained away.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And once the water has been thoroughly drained away, take a piece of paper or cotton, insert one end into the ear, and extend the other end towards fire until the middle of it is burned.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	Then insert another piece of cotton and do this as many times until all the water has been thoroughly drained away, and strain it with a tube as was mentioned above regarding the stone extractor.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	However, in the extraction of a small creature entering into that ear, if it is of small size and appears similar, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is large and causes pain deep in the eardrum, then administer its extraction with gestures and incisions, and the cause of this is lighter than all other causes that occur in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	However, in the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, when you treat it as we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillations and your treatment does not take effect, then you must examine the ear in the sunlight.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And so if any cause of worms appears here, then extract them with gestures or with subtle hooks; but if no cause appears, then take a tube that is narrow at one end and wide at the other, which has this form:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the slender extremity into the ear according to the amount that the patient can tolerate; then suck through it strongly with suction, and do this several times until all the worms are expelled.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	And if you do not obey the instructions, then plug and close the cannula circuit with wax as we have said; then administer distillates that have already been proven effective in the treatment of worms, and you will find this in the chapter on distillates.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let your effusion be with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear using this instrument, which has the following form:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make it of silver or brass, leave it straight, with a small tube in it, and a plate on top.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And thus it should be designed to fit into the cavity of the cannula container where it will be necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you want, take the rod and wrap the end of it properly with cloth, then pour oil into the concavity of the ear or juice from some herb, or whichever of these medicines you choose into the cannula — which is in the ear — then insert the rod with cloth on top and press firmly with your hand to expel the oil into the concavity of the ear so that the patient feels the oil inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And that which is inserted into the ear should already be slightly warmed with fire.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And be careful that the substance you will distill into the ear is not too cold, for medicines for the ear do not tolerate that.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the treatment of ear obstruction.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Sometimes, some children are born from mothers with unperforated ear canals, and this can also happen in adults, where the ear canal is obstructed by plaque or flesh growing in that area; and this obstruction sometimes occurs in the inner part of the ear canal which does not allow sound to pass through, and at other times it is on the outer parts.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which occurs in the inner part of it, which does not allow sound to pass through, is among the more difficult conditions to heal.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in the case where sound can be perceived, you should expose the patient's ear to the sun and observe it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And when there is an apparent swelling, open it with a fine scalpel which has this form:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the extremity of it in which the width is small, one part being sharp and the other not; and the spatula should be of two sides like a lion so that it does not harm the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And therefore, if the obstruction is due to flesh grown in the ear or on the body, then take that with fine needles and cut it out forcefully and easily until all the flesh is removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if there is an obstruction in the ear canal, then take fine wool and warm it slightly over fire, and then place it in the ear canal.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And thus, if you find that the patient breathes easily with this, it indicates that due to the difficulty of breathing, the compression on them is eased; and be careful not to harm the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then place in the ear a piece of cloth soaked with the quantity of ointment you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or take some wax, dip it into warm water and powder over it with finely ground ingredients and use it; and if you find that the ear is already abscessed, then you must remove the wax and replace it with other wax which you will wrap in wax made with rose oil until the abscess begins to yield; and continue treating it until it heals.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	And if a flow of blood occurs, then soak a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use another treatment that restricts the flow of blood, which is described in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	The text appears to be in an old Romance language
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	Here is the translation of the given line:
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Moisten those that lead to the eyelids of the eyes sometimes with moisture, sometimes they are dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore, you must hold those with tweezers or with your fingers, and cut them with a knife from their roots, and then place your hand over the sutured areas.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	If pain with a flow of blood occurs, then you cauterize those areas with a subtle lens-shaped cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is performed near the incisions and visible veins returning when there remains any cause of their recurrence; and when they are cauterized with fire, those veins are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment for swelling that occurs in the eyelids of the eyes.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Visible particles appearing in the eyelids of the eyes, some cause of which resembles swelling in its strength and hardness, and thus the swelling is called by this name.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an accumulation of thick moisture on the eyelid, both below and above.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the operation for it is to consider whether the swelling is occurring in such a way that it appears from the eyelid and is soft all around; and the cause of it is slight.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore, make an incision over it along its width, and then squeeze it all around to easily release the contents until it dries out, and then suspend it with an ounce and cut it off.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if you are not prepared at the start of the procedure and must penetrate the eyelid with small incisions little by little, then this should not cause any concern.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the wound is large, then you adjust it with sutures; and take care of what is inside so that it heals.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, you will not suffer harm from it because the warmth of it restores and reattaches that area.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the swelling is decreasing inside the eyelid and on its inner surface, open the eyelid and suspend the swelling with a needle, so that you do not need to start incising from the beginning, and press it from all sides. If the eyelid has been lengthened by an incision, this should not cause any concern.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	Then before the procedure, wash the wound with salt water; and treat the area in such a way that it promotes healing until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	On the treatment around the upper eyelid of the eye.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And for this reason you find them lying on their faces all the time, and they sleep with their faces down; and so to their eyelids the wet eyebrows stick, which have already been covered by swelling, and a prominence of cataract is apparent in the eye; and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel the cataract inside them.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And in some manner of operation is this: the patient places their head on your lap, and then place a cloth under them and make it warm, and make a circle according to the quantity which contains arthernach (possibly a type of medication) from all parts, and then place that over that and press with your fingers around so that the cataract is aggregated in the middle of the circle, and then scrape out the moisture in the middle with a spatula inserted longitudinally with a slit, and the slit should not be larger than the slit made in flaubotomy (a type of surgical procedure).
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	However, in the first step, you must cut through the entire capsule until you reach the cataract, because in most positions, you will process the cataract through a slit according to the form of white grease (likely describing the appearance or consistency of the cataract).
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Therefore, take that out with cloths which you have wrapped around the said areas on the outer parts and roll between your right and left hand until it is dispersed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be careful not to insert too deeply so that with the spatula you do not reach the wound and avoid that from happening.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	If it does not appear to you that the artery appears at the beginning of the fissure, then adjust in the fissure a small piece where the artery will process; and then extract that as we have said; and then apply cloths soaked in wine and agreeable water over the area and press them with powder.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And so some use salt and place it in the cavity of the fissure so that it can draw out that moisture.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that which is inside so that it may be healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	And if you encounter an abscess in that area, then treat it with soft plasters until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	On methods of applying to the stomach.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When on the eyelids of the eyes, unnatural and old hairs grow, these irritate the eye and lead to various ailments such as constant tearing and softening of the eyelids and membranes, which can eventually cause destruction of the eye called "tactinir" of the eye. It is cured in four ways: by cauterization with fire; or with sharp medicine as mentioned before in the chapter on cauteries; or it is treated by incision and suturing; or by using tubes as I will explain.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	Therefore, you must position the head of the patient in such a way; then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand. If it turns easily, that is good; if not, insert a needle into the part where there is pus beneath the eyelid, and let the needle penetrate upwards with thread close to the margin of the eyelid where the hairs grow, near the hairs. Pull the thread towards the upper parts with the eyelid, and turn it back in place.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then insert the tip of a spatula between the eyelids, adjusting the hairs with an instrument that directs the tears from the larger tear duct into the smaller one; and then extract the bile and place a small amount of cloth or cotton powder on the eyelid, and then suture over the eyelid with thread, and let it be thus as shown in the figure of the myrtle leaf.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, the figure should be according to the amount of elevation of the eyelid, for this varies among individuals, as some require a significant incision in the upper eyelid depending on how much the eyelid has sagged.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then insert with the spatula along the two lines that you have marked, starting from the larger tear duct into the smaller one.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your incision is near the natural hairs, it should be thick like that of the king. 
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then place the needle in one of the two angles of the chain, and then scrape that area completely, and then suture the two edges together with a thread or fine woolen string, and clean the blood, and apply what is superfluous from the ointments over both eyebrows with some viscous causes if you want to do so, and if not, ignore it.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And then remove the suture of the ointments within three or four days, and then care for it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, leave the wound without sutures, and treat it with substances that dry and constrict, for the eyelid being raised requires sealing of the wound and aggregation of tissue; however, suturing is better. Therefore, this is what the ancients taught regarding treatment.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	However, one must be careful with the patient, and it is a good practice, and not out of fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another method in surgery, which involves marking on the eyelid in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and then lifting the eyelid with three separate needles arranged in this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	If it is not possible to do that, hold the hooks, and if this is not sufficient, then take a needle with thread and insert it into the center of the figure, and place another thread near the larger lacrimal duct, and the second thread near the smaller lacrimal duct, and adjust between those threads with equality, and then with those lift your hand with equal elevation, lifting all the chain on which is marked as we have described.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust the two lips of the wound with sutures, and treat the inside so that it may heal.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	However, if an abscess occurs in your incision or fissure, drain that abscess with cautery and similar methods, and with unguents.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And sometimes you may encounter an eyelid where the hairs are inverted; then you must use in this case what we have said about incision; however, suturing is more intricate in some cases.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	To straighten with rods follows this method:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And it is that you turn the eyelid inside out and divide the figure within as I have described; then, make two rods or two fine splints whose length should be according to the length of the eyelid and their width should be half the width of the spatium.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already cut into the ends of each section where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then add each with subtlety on the excess of the eyelid of the eye, and constrict the canals of each section with strong binding, and leave it like that for several days, because the chain will die due to the constriction, become detached, and will decay inside before falling out by itself.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	But if it is delayed, then break it at the roots, and then treat the wound until it heals.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	When it is solidified, the eyelid is raised and the hairs do not poke.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the form of two canals which you will make according to this shape:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and there should be the quantity of the length and width neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	On the removal of painful hairs in the eye with a needle when the hair is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When unnatural, hard, and rough hairs pierce the skin, during the operation on him you should take a fine needle and place it in that thread of fine linen or silk, and then adjust the ends of it tightly in each hand with great subtlety.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And let the length of the fields be a quantity of one palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then you apply another subtle ointment over it briefly, and bind the extremities of that if you so desire.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then place the patient's head on your lap, and be close to the sunlight so that your work may be clearly seen, for it is a subtle and delicate operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then insert the needle into the root of the hair that requires treatment, and make it penetrate quickly into the eyelid before removing it from the natural hair. 
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull the hair inward and insert it into the incision, and let there be one or two or three hairs and no more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand so that the hair is removed along with the incision in the eyelid with the natural hair. 
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	If the wound is attractive to infection and the pus has not been expelled, you should apply an ointment to the areas around it with the salve that you have composed with that, so that the infection from the wound can be expelled effectively.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And you see that with the vision of the wound, because when you remove the bandages and the dressing, and open up each part of the wound, and leave the clamps for two or three days, until the hair adheres to its place and new good flesh grows over it.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the hair is shorter, then you attach a long natural hair to it, and lift with that, or leave it inside so that it is stretched out by some space, and then you lift it.
Capitol .xiii.	The text appears to be in an old Romance language
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	Based on the structure and vocabulary that resembles Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, here is an attempted translation of the provided line:
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When the eye is affected by spasms, and there is contraction of the eyelid when it contracts inwardly or to the right or left side due to poor healing from plagues or dryness or cautery, and this is called leporine, and this spasm is either natural or accidental, and it is caused by poor healing from wounds or dryness or cauteries, or similar ailments.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And you do not need to use treatments for the causes that dry out; constrain them instead; for if you do this, it will return a worse discharge of pus than was ever there before.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use in that of causes which mollify thus as fenugreek is, and foment with the water in which they are boiled leaves and seeds of it, or balm ointment, which is liquefied with some of the oils, and submerge the cloth in that, and treat with that.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your cure is that you should pierce with any instrument that is not consolidated according to the form that at the beginning was soft.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation which we have mentioned is nothing but some correction of dislocation that does not return the area to its former shape as it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Of the treatment for ectropion, which occurs in the eyelid.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This ectropion, which occurs in the lower eyelid and is properly called ectropion; it can be either a natural condition or an accidental one.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	The accidental type is caused by trauma, cuts, cautery, or other similar factors.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the method of the operation is that you take a needle with double thread, and insert it into the flesh, making it pass from the left tear duct to the right one, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then stretch the flesh apart with the needle and sew it together with the needle, and incise with a broad spatula.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And then return the shape of the eyelid as needed; if not, take a reed and place it in the split area, and use that to turn the eyelid back into place, creating two slits on the sides of the lower eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And let the ends of the two cracks from two angles of the incision that you have made converge together, and from them make an angle where they meet to form a figure from them.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is a Greek letter: lambda. 
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then remove the flesh in the amount that is the width of the sharp object left behind, which is the eyelid. 
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the separated parts and sew them together with wool thread; and then treat them with what we have said about the mollifying medicines and the plasters until they are healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if you need to incise due to a fissure or suture or cautery, then you must make a flat incision over the skin of the eyelid as indicated.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate with the plaster between the two lips as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In summary, for the treatment of incisions that are above or below, which occur during the operation, according to the form in which the incision is prepared, and that form varies in different ways.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skilled artisans always prepare in each manner that is possible for them until they return the figure to its natural form or close to it, and they do so according to what is most convenient for the patient in terms of the operation and the instruments being in the best conditions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation occurs in some men, you may find that the upper eyelid is adhered to the white part of the eye, and it is restricted in its movement and natural functions. Therefore, you must insert the tip of a probe under the eyelid, lift it up or extend it with a spatula.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	Then you cut through the adhesion with a fine spatula, which should not be sharp at the edges; make it slightly blunt so that the patient is not disturbed during the operation, and use the spatula in such a way that its sharpness does not harm the eye.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And your incision should be such that it easily removes the adhesion, so that the eyelid returns to its natural form and the entire adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	Then you put salty water into the eye with which you wash it; or drip onto it dissolved zinziber (ginger) in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	Then separate the eyelid from the eye with a blunt hook, and place wool soaked in egg white over the eye. On the third day, use binding agents until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	The text provided appears to be in an archaic
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	Regarding the beginning of nail growth and the prominence of flesh around the lacrimal areas.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that an ulcer is of two kinds, for it can be nervous, and it resembles a hard and subtle chip; or it is non-nervous, resembling white frozen moisture, which when touched with iron, either forcefully takes the iron into itself, breaks off, and the iron does not stick to it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both conditions do not begin until the major tear duct is involved, whereby sight is gradually restored and you prevent light and movement of air.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	And the method of working during the incision is that the patient places his head in your lap, and then open their eyelids, lift the eyelid with your hand, and then grasp the ulcer with a needle using minimal doubling and extend that to the parts above.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take a needle and insert into it a horsehair or ox hair or cow hair, or something similar, or strong thread, or double the tip of the needle little by little and place that in the middle of the nail, and penetrate that with the needle, and bind the nail with thread; and extend that to the parts above, and scrape with the hair the side of the nail which is the pupilla. 
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And in this way you should proceed by inserting the peel into the rear of him.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then you incise the remainder at the root of the tear duct with a fine spatula or small scissors, and separate the tissue around the natural tear duct so that from this incision there does not result continuous flow of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the nail is extended with the sun once or with fire, as we have said, and then it should be extracted with a spatula shaped like this: 
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And be careful that with the spatula you do not touch the corneal membrane and cause a rupture, and that the pupil is not pierced.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then, place a little ground salt or finely made cerate in the eye, and leave it there until the next day; then treat it with what is necessary until it is healed.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the nail is not sensitive and you cannot insert the needle, nor can it be fixed in that way, then this type of nail issue is treated with medicines and is healed thus, as I have described and recommended in the section.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to incise that area, then open the eye of the patient and take a fine spatula with a sharpened edge according to this form:
am subtilitat.	with delicacy.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if you find that it is rarefied and confused and requires treatment, then apply a distillation of your own urine to the eye with finely made cerate or with warm cerate or ground salt, and cover the eye until the next day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat the operation on that area to remove all of what is from it, but rather let a counter-empyrum be cauterized in the wound, because when you leave that, treat the beginning of the empyrum until it heals.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat your operation on that area until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The prominence of the lacrimal flesh, if noted in the nose for great harm, should be suspended with an ounce; and cut that part from it, but do not complete the incision so that you do not cut the tear ducts.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a decoction of rue and make an ointment until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	On the incision of a stye and what is born from tight flesh in the nose.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Sometimes in the eyes of some, rough flesh grows and covers the pupil, or approaches and tightens near the eyelids, forcing them to adhere to the outer parts and gather like a railing around it.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	The operation involves the patient placing their head on your lap. Then open their eyes and gather all that flesh with appropriate tweezers or forceps; then incise the flesh at its beginning until it is entirely finished with the scalpel, and be careful not to hurt the eye during your procedure.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And let your incision be with which you cut those places or with the scalpel that we have recommended in the section on the nail, or with small scissors with which ashcel is collected according to how it will come in the form of this near chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Therefore, when your incision is complete and all that flesh is cauterized, then fill the wound with finely ground salt or sprinkle on it red powder similar to corrosive medicines, and place over the wound outside a cloth with egg white inside to ensure it does not become infected through cautery.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if any cause of guardianship remains and there is a lot of purulent discharge, and you fear an abscess may form, then leave the wound open and treat that abscess with whatever relieves that abscess, and then re-operate on it until it is healed, and similarly deal with the adjacent flesh where such a wound occurs.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	However, you must be aware that all healing of the wound should occur either naturally or accidentally, through the use of tools, and do not put your hand into any of these operations until you see that the limb can sufficiently tolerate such an operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	On the collection of pus in the wound.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Pus comes from inflamed veins that are hardened over the wound and prevent proper healing of the tissue, causing the wound to fester for a long time.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, at the beginning, it is necessary for you to determine if the wound in which there is pus is strong and if there is no other illness besides the pus; then you should collect that pus.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And you command the patient to rest their head on your lap, and then suspend those veins with an ounce or two according to your judgment; and that ounce should be of fine double threading in this manner:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	Or use two ounces gradually in one piece according to this method:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And then gather those veins with fine threads tightly, carefully, and wipe the blood little by little until you see those veins emptied of blood and turned pale.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And be careful that you do not lead the blood with the ends of the spatula; and let your operation be in the middle of the day when the sun is up, and be firm in your operation so that you only incise those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed the procedure, then apply wormwood or rue to the blood because its acidity will corrode what remains of the sabell (a term that might refer to a residue or clot).
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	But if it is not possible for you to complete everything in that hour, then apply a plaster with something that reduces the pain, and leave it for several days until the pain is subdued and there is no risk of an abscess forming.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then apply the same method to the second one until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form of the scissors:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On the reduction of nasal fractures.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat fractures with cauterization or sharp, burning medicine as previously mentioned in the narration and it is not healed, then do not hesitate but make an incision over the abscess until it ripens, and extract all the moisture within it so that the bone is revealed.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then when the bone is revealed and there is corruption or blackening in it, you scrape it with an instrument that has the following form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is called a rough head, and it is made of Indian iron, and its head is round like an asir which is made by puncturing with a file or by subtle punching (as shown in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place it on the corrupted part of the bone, then rotate it between your fingers, and press your hand little by little until you know that the corruption has been scraped away.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And this should be done several times, and then restore the area with drying and astringent causes. 
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Therefore, if the site is stabilized and good flesh has formed there and the body has been separated from the pus and remains so for forty days, and it does not recur and does not become inflamed again and no accidents happen to it, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, then it is not about generating but rather reducing the fissure to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: you should expose the bone with fire or with sharp medicine, and once the bone is exposed, then take a tool according to this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The end of the tool should be triangular, and the handle should be narrowed towards the tip in such a way as described.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	Then place that [tool] on the bone, near the lacrimal area; extend your hand a little from the nose, and then rotate your hand with the tool until it penetrates all the way through the bone. The patient will feel it deeply as air is found to escape when you do this.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore, now restore the area with styptic and drying medicines as has been mentioned.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Therefore, when the flesh and the area becomes hardened, then the matter which was spread to the outer parts returns inside, thus this makes the condition lighter for the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Capitol .xx.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	Of the reduction of the hernia bulge.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the swelling appears completely and does not cause any harm or reduction in the soft tissue, then you should purge the patient, and then follow up, and then place ventousa [cupping] on the neck for scarification and suction by good leeching; and then apply to the swelling a liniment that is made of cataplasma and aloe and honey and sarcocolla, and then strengthen the plaster over the swelling with fine powder.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the method of powders is that you take skins of mulled lions, and each skin should be folded into four pieces; and make those powders.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then place those one over the other according to the amount that the wound requires.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And then press on those with a hard cloth with strong binding; and repeat the cupping after bloodletting; and then remove the cups and leave the wound exposed day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	And if the bandage becomes loose in the meantime, then it must be tightened.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And then remove the bandage day and night as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the wound has already been reduced, it is good, and if not, then repeat the poultice with the powders and binding and cupping until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	On the incision of the uveal tunica (or uvea).
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is disruption in the uveal tunica and it protrudes beyond the eyelids resembling a knot of flesh, and takes on a human-like form due to this, if you wish to incise it, the operation should be performed as follows: you insert a needle into the base of the uvea from below upwards, and then place another needle with double thread on the side near the lacrimal region, making sure that the first needle remains in its position; then incise the area of the double thread and lift the part of the uvea around the needle, and press it firmly.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	Then remove the needle and place over the wound wool infused in egg white, leaving it until the thread comes out with the grape.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then treat the wound with something that strengthens it internally so that the plague may be healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And sometimes, gather from all sides with a circle of cloth around the swollen wound, and then pierce it with a fine spatula to reach the core of the wound, allowing the whitish fluid to drain out, and reduce the swelling as soon as possible.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen it internally so that it may heal.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio de alconati.	On the treatment of dislocations.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This ailment, which is called dislocation, is nothing but a swelling that is attached to the wound, resembling descending water, but it is not actually so.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The method of treating it is to have the patient sit on an adjusted and straight chair. Then take their head in both of your hands and move it so that you can see the swelling appear at the respective parts, and then dry it so that it does not descend. Keep the light steady so that the patient sees the causes just as they are.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not descend downward, know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	And if the descent of the pus has not been prepared as we have said, then place the patient between your hands and take a thin spatula and use it to gently separate the panniculus from the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corneal tunic at the limbus (inside the eye), until the pus is completely removed.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Once it is completely removed, then you should instill warm water into the nose, in which you have mixed honey, or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then it should be treated with other methods until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the treatment of water (discharge) descending from the nose.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already mentioned the types of discharge in the division and which ones are suitable for piercing with clear sermons (treatment), according to health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Now you must place the patient between your hands on a stool and tie their nose with a strong bandage.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And then place your left hand near the eyelid of his eye if the eye in which there is water is the left eye; or with your right hand, if the eye is the right one.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And then with your right hand take an almond if the eye is left; or with your left hand, if the eye is right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And then place the tip of the almond near the crown along the thickness of the ray in the white part of the eye near the smaller tear duct, and then apply the almond with force and rotate your hand with it.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then penetrate into the white part of the eye and feel that the almond has already reached its target depth.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And it must be that the measurement of the path of the almond to the front is the same as the distance from the pupil to the end of the black part, which is the crown of the eye; for you will see the pupil with the vision of the eye through the clarity of the cornea.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And then place the almond in the location where the water is, and then pull it down once and then again, and if the water descends immediately, you will see the patient regain their sight immediately, with the almond still in their eye.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then rest for a while; if the water has descended, now you wait another period before any medication is administered.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And then when it is cut and does not descend, now you extract the medication easily, and rotate with that your hand little by little, and then dissolve in the water a small amount of clear salt from gemma and wash the hole inside with that; then place outside the hole a plug or stopper or wool infused in ointment and egg white and bind it with that to the hole.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	But we and those of our time place on that wound some crushed material mixed with egg white.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if your medication does not adhere to the inside of the hole due to its hardness—for there are some people whose holes are very hard—then you must take the spatula named alberid, which has the following form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And then pierce that joint with it, and do not insert your hand deeply into the wound, but only make a fine place for the medication.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then insert a suppository as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And complete your work by preparing the patient's sleeping area properly, in which they should sleep on their back in a dark room, and all movements are prohibited.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And pause to understand the nature of the condition so that you align their natural disposition, and do not turn their head to the right or left at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And apply the bandage according to its placement within the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then remove that [bandage] in the dark room and expose it to fresh air, and show them some causes [of their condition], and then reapply the bandage within seven days.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And it is not necessary to do this during the time of treatments or right before the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	However, it is necessary that you do this so that the water can gently permeate and with great caution.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	But if an abscess forms, then you must remove the bandage before the seventh day and treat it with something that reduces the abscess.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And then it is gently rolled from that side while turning over onto its causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in surgery it is not excused for the disciple to see certain things multiple times, and therefore you should be bold during the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And it has been passed down to us from some of those who are in the Artach, and some said that fire is made in an Ayrac which is perforated with a tool by which water is sucked up.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	But however I have not seen anyone in our land who has perfected this, nor have I read this in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of mandrake for which one should be aware of them, by whom those who are ignorant of them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they should be made of leather or proper iron, and their extremities should have this triangular fineness, the sharp end thus as that is the form.
Capitol .xxiv.	Capitol .xxiv.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	For the given line:
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose diverse fleshy growths are formed from which there is some cause that resembles clusters of stones or a large polyp; and this illness is called polypus because it resembles that large polyp represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And it is cancerous flesh that is ulcerated and of a dark color; and there is also flesh that is not cancerous which is not of a dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in those cases where the flesh is not fraudulent nor cancerous, you should have the patient sit between your hands and expose them to the sun, clean their nostrils, and apply some ointment to those areas of the flesh.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	Then extract it from the outer parts, and then divide what you have grasped of those with a sharp and delicate spatula from one part until you know that all the flesh has been removed; for if any cause remains that makes separation possible, then you can easily scrape away that part with one of the delicate instruments until no such cause remains.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	But if it is dominated by blood or a suppurative swelling, then you apply what is necessary; if it is one of the malignant swellings, then you cut and cauterize that area until all the blood is separated and the cavities are completely removed.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And then pour into the nose near the incision some wine or water.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	And if the nose is opened and you process humidity into the palate, then you know that it is already healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	But if the humidity does not penetrate as it should, then you know that inside there is flesh with pus over the bones of the nose to which incision has not reached.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore, now it is necessary to insert a thread into which some thickness is added, and tie knots on the thread, placing between each knot a distance equal to a finger or thumb, and prepare the patient and insert one end of the thread into the nose using a rod or another means that is possible.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And after this has been done, draw the odorant inside so that it reaches the channels of the nose, and sit on your heel, as many times observed in children at schools who do this action, and it is an easy method for those who want to perform it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then place both ends of the thread, one end coming out of the nose and the other remaining inside the nose, and then apply a flesh suture using the knots on the thread, doing this until you know that the flesh is secured by the knots of the thread.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then extract the bile, and place near the nose during the abstraction of blood a sponge, and do this for three days or more until the poultice corrodes everything that is rotten in the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And at the end of the treatment, place a lead cannula in the nose for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	And if you decide to use a drying treatment, apply that one.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument used to administer nasal treatments with which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And make this from silver or brass, shaped like a small open lamp, resembling a little bowl, and the mouth similarly.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you wish, make a closed tube like a reed, and the cannula of the instrument for administering nasal treatments should be flat and open; it should have a handle at the back, with which you hold it when heating oil or water mixed with the juices and medicinal causes.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these nasal treatments are valuable: take castor bean, white balsam, ginger, saffron costus, long pepper, scammony, and thyme, each an ounce. Mix them with juice from lettuce and cabbage, and make pills. Dissolve one pill in tepid water and instill it into the nostrils of the patient while they are lying down.
Capitol .xxv.	Capitol .xxv.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	The sentence "De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas" seems to be a mix of languages similar to those you
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Based on the given sentence and the pattern from previous translations, here is an interpretation and translation into English:
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And by this, it is necessary that you incise at the beginning of its appearance and remove all of it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And then place over the area where the cautery or burning medicine is located.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	And if the initiation of treatment is delayed until it has worsened, then consider whether it has become calcified, hard, dark in color, and less sensitive; at this point, do not touch it with iron, for it is a chronic abscess; many have found that incising such an abscess only brings great harm to the patient.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the abscess is somewhat fresh and not dark in color, and incision is possible at all stages, then treat the patient and incise it without fear, and care for the area with substances that dry and constrict until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	On the suturing of the nose and lips and ear when continuity is disrupted by injury or a similar cause.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when there is a disruption of continuity in one of these cartilages, there is little confidence in this operation unless it is performed on certain individuals.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when you encounter any cause of those wounds, you should consider whether it is fresh with its own blood, and then you stitch the two edges of the wound together with suture, and then care for the inside so that it heals.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the edges of the wound are already separated and each part has healed, then you must scrape each portion of its visible scab until blood comes out.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then bring the two edges together with sutures and tighten them, and sprinkle dragon's blood powder over them, which has been finely ground. Place a piece of diafinition plaster or another type of consolidating plaster over the powder, and leave it there for two or three days. Then remove the bandage and replace the plaster until the pus is naturally separated, and then care for it with an ointment until it heals.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	The method of suturing is that you close the wound either with needles as we have recommended for stitching the abdomen, or you can close the wound with thread in whatever way you find suitable.
Capitol .xxvii.	Capitol .xxvii.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	From the extraction of those causes that appear between the two lips inside.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Motaz veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, it is necessary that you turn and examine each of those wounds from all sides, then fill the place with crushed sage until the blood is stopped, and wash it with sweet wine and treat the area with something astringent until it heals.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	From the incision of the flesh fitted into the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	There are many swellings above the flesh fitted to the gum, which the ancients called alveoli; therefore, you must suspend that with a hook or hold that with forceps and incise it deeply at its root, allowing the pus or blood to flow.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	Then apply some astringent powder or other styptic or cicatrizant powders to the area.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then incise it again and cauterize it, because after the cautery, it will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	On the extraction of teeth with forceps.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth, both those inside and outside, and between the gums, there are rough, sharp tartar deposits, stains, and some swellings that are blackened or have a yellowish or green tinge, this leads to corruption in the gum and causes the teeth to become loose.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And therefore it is necessary that you seat the patient between your hands and place their head on your thigh, and extract the teeth in which you find those scabs and cause likenesses of sand to be removed so that no cause remains, and this is done for the blackness and the yellowness and the other things so that they may be cleansed.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Therefore, if what is at the beginning of the reasoning remains so; and if not, then you repeat the reasoning on those another day and the second and the third until it comes to the final statement in which you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And know that teeth require various forms and different shapes of forceps according to what is prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And therefore the razor with which the tooth is cut from inside is different from the razor with which it is cut between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of razors you should prepare, which you will see shortly:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter .xxx.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	For the eradication of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	Here is the translation of the given text:
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	Here is the translation of the provided medieval medical treatise sentence into English:
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, you must be certain which tooth is causing the pain, and once you know well, then it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth with a spatula that has some efficacy, until the tooth is separated from the gum on all sides, and then remove it with your fingers or with fine scissors little by little until it comes out completely.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then take large strong forceps for good extraction or crushing, and hold the patient's head between your hands firmly so that they do not move, and then pull the tooth straight out in such a way that you do not break it nor cause greater pain to the patient.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And if it is not easily extracted, then take one of those instruments and carefully remove it from all sides, applying effort to its removal just as was done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is loose or decayed, then you must wrap a piece of cloth around the loose part and secure it with the tip of a fine probe so that it does not break when you apply pressure to it with forceps.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And it is necessary that you work carefully with scarification around the entire area of the gum and guard well your strength so as not to tear that part and leave any piece broken, and return to the patient for the harm may be greater than the first pain he experienced.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And be careful not to do what some ignorant barbers do in their stubbornness and audacity regarding the extraction of them; for they administer things that we have recommended against; because many times they cause great illnesses in men which are more difficult to treat, and the roots of these remain stubbornly fixed, or some of those, or extract it along with some bones of the jaw as we have often witnessed.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And then for the removal of it, wash the mouth with hot wine or sour wine with salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if bleeding occurs because of this, just as intermittent bleeding may occur, then sprinkle some amount of cypress on the wound, and if the cypress does not help, apply a cautery.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The form of the forceps and delicate tongs with which a tooth is extracted at the beginning should be long at the outer end, short in handling, and thick, so that they do not bend when you use them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And they should be such that despite having thick handles so that they do not bend when you grasp them, their outer ends are short.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And they should be made of Indian iron, properly crafted with straight ends. At the ends of these instruments, there are teeth that fit into each other and grip by strong constriction. Sometimes, the ends of these tools have the shape of the beak of a bird called a ciconia, which is a stork, and they provide a powerful constriction.
Capitol .xxxi.	Capitol .xxxi.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	For the eradication of teeth and extraction of the bones of the trapped jaws.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need to extract a tooth that is broken, leaving some part behind, then it is necessary for you to place something cold on the area with a cloth for one or two days until the spot becomes softened; and then insert tweezers or tongs, whose ends are assembled in the shape of the beak of a bird called stork or cuckoo, the form of the forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The extremities of their limbs should be treated in such a way as with a file or a rasp.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if it does not obey to you with these forceps or tongs, then you must cut into the root and peel away all the flesh and introduce the tool which is called an atalis, that is a small lever of which the shape is as follows:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And let there be a small thick extremity of short length, and do not insert it too deeply so that it is not broken. 
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Therefore, if through this the incision is deeply made, it is good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is triangular at the tip, in which there should be some thickness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second instrument is that it should be triangular and have a finer tip.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And already it is aided with this instrument having two prongs, the form of which is as follows:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And with other instruments which are used for tooth scraping; because it is very useful to do this with an instrument that resembles an onion in size, and this is the form:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	From the twisted or shortened triangular extremity, which has some thickness, and should not be buried deeply to prevent it from breaking.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And you should know that the dental instruments are made similarly to the other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	May the skilled and subtle artisans find for themselves according to what the operation and diverse diseases signify; for there are diseases for which the ancients neither spoke nor provided specific instruments, due to the forms of various types.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the jawbone or other bones of the mouth are fractured, or if you need to, then treat it by placing it in its proper position using what is appropriate from the instruments and forceps which we have mentioned in the extraction of tooth roots, and assist with gestures which take this form:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And let there be any swelling reduced little by little, and let it be compressed or held with the mouth so that it does not escape or spread until the bone is fully set; then restore the area with appropriate medicines.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a small ulcer on the bone, then scrape away that ulcer and its darkness, and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Capitol .xxxii.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	Regarding the care of prominent teeth over the others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When the prominent teeth do not follow their natural course and are loose in form, especially when it happens to women, and particularly to those who are more venerable; therefore you must consider: if a tooth is close to another tooth and cannot be pulled or bound with anything, then you must extract that one; but if it is not attached to another tooth, then you cut it out with this instrument of which this is the shape; and it resembles a pig's snout, and should be made from Indian iron with an extremely sharp edge.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And let your incision be such that you cut it out over several days due to the hardness of the tooth, and so as not to damage any other teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the prominent tooth is exposed to filing, then file it with an Indian iron file, which has this shape:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And let it all be made of Indian iron, including the edge; and it should be made of very fine points like the file with which needles are made, with which the tooth should be filed little by little over several days with ease, so that no other tooth is damaged or hurt.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And then sew that up at the end, and shave that area with sharp razors.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if it is a tooth of which a part is broken and it affects the tongue, then you must file that inside so that the roughness of that fracture is removed and smoothed out, and it should be filled so that the tongue is not hurt nor the speech corrupted.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On the restoration of damaged teeth with gold or silver filings.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When you encounter front teeth that have been displaced or knocked out due to impact or falling, and the patient cannot chew on that side of their mouth, and you have treated it with astringent medicines but your treatment has not worked, then in order to prevent further decay, they should be secured with gold filings and not silver ones, because silver can corrode and fall off within a few days, whereas gold never changes.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And the filling should be of such fineness and thickness so that it can fit between the teeth; the method is to take the filling material and place twice as much between two healthy teeth, then build it up with two curved pieces of the filling material between the damaged teeth, or if there is one or several, until the material reaches the healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then repeat the probing within the area where you started, and insert your hand with ease and skill so that it is not rough.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And use the tool with which you hold the threads of the teeth that you are removing. 
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then separate the excess bile from the extremities using forceps or tongs, and apply those [instruments] in each place with care, and position them between the healthy tooth and the diseased one, so that they do not injure the tongue. 
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then loosen that tightly as a rope.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	If it is loosened or broken, strengthen that or those with another thread in such a manner throughout its entire length.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the reaction of two healthy teeth and two decayed ones, just as these are shown:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when you return a tooth or two near the socket of each to their places, and they have grown back as we have described, and that they no longer decay.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And only skilled and wise artisans do this.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And sometimes a piece of cow's bone is shaped and formed like a tooth, and it is placed in the location where the tooth is missing, and it is secured as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	On the condition of the ligament that affects the tongue and prohibits speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament that affects the tongue sometimes is natural, with which a person is born, or it is accidental and occurs due to an injury that has already healed.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation on him is that you open the mouth of the patient, with his head existing in your lap; and lift his tongue, and then cut through that nervous membrane according to the width within which the tongue is separated from its root.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	And if there is any hardness or knotting in that area and it has become solid due to an infection, then you should cut into it and split it lengthwise where you have not yet divided the ligament and dissolve the knot.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And be careful that no cut is made in the layer of flesh and that you do not tear any artery, causing blood to flow.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And then wash the remnants of the incision with wine or vinegar or cold water; and place a linen cloth over it. This is the method by which the patient should keep their tongue moist each night to prevent it from becoming hardened again. 
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	And if blood flow occurs, place powdered vitriol over the area; but if the bleeding continues, then cauterize the area with a red-hot cautery which is suitable for this purpose.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with other methods until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter .xxxv.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	For the given line from the medieval medical treatise:
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation on him is that you open the mouth of the patient sixty [minutes] before sunrise and examine the swelling.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see it of dark or black color, hard, in which the patient does not feel sensation, then do not touch that which is gangrenous.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it has turned white, in which there is moisture, then you insert the needle into it and cut that with a fine spatula; and dissect it from all sides. And if blood flows during the time of your operation, then you place over it a piece of linen soaked in vitriol until the bleeding stops.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then return to your work until you have completely removed it, washing it with sweet wine and salt; and treat that area with the other cure until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XXXVI.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the extraction of abscesses from the ears and those that occur in the throat, as well as other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When they occur in the throat area, these are glands that resemble cotton and are located externally, known as the ears. When you treat them with what we have said in the division and it does not heal, then consider whether the abscess is hard, dark in color, and has little sensation; at this time do not touch it with metal.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of red color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron because of the blood flow; first let that mature inside, and then either you will extract that, or it will come out broken by itself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of white color, like a root, and the tip of it is delicate, then that is what needs to be incised.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation on it is that you consider, before your operation, if the swelling has already rested from being cauterized with complete rest or if it has decreased by some reduction; and then have the patient sit facing the sun, and his head should be in your sight, open his mouth, and the servant taking between their hands firmly the tongue of the patient with an instrument of noble form, which looks like this:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And it should be made of silver or iron, and it should be sharp like a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	So as you press with that the tongue and the swelling is shown to you, spit over it with your saliva, then take an ounce and insert that into the swelling, and pull it outwards as much as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And here is the translation of the given line:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	And it is similar to forceps, however the ends of it are curved, so that the opening of each one is in line with the other, quite sharp, which is made of hardened iron.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	But if this instrument is not present with you, then incise it with a spatula of which this is the form: And it should be sharp on one side, blunt on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And since you have incised one side, incise the other in the same manner of incision, and then the patient will heal with cold water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is continued bleeding, heal with water decoction of pomegranate peel or myrtle leaves and similar styptic agents until the bleeding is stopped, and then treat it until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And sometimes there may appear other swellings or abscesses in the throat or around the ears, and incise them as I have said in the incision of two sides equally.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I have already treated a woman with an abscess that had formed in her throat, which abscess tended to a dark color, was nearly insensitive, and had already closed off her throat. The woman was breathing with great difficulty, and she had already been denied food and water. She was close to death if it had lasted for one or two more days.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had risen so much that it had split into two paths through which it would exit from two routes. 
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Therefore I treated it surgically and inserted one of those needles into it, and pulled that out, and the large portion was removed from him, then I incised that where I understood from another wound, and then I closed its mouth, and held its tongue, and then I inserted the needle into that swelling.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then I cut away a large part of it, and there was only a little bit of bleeding from it.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Therefore, the belly of that woman is absolutely distended, and she should start drinking water immediately, and then consume food. So I did not stop incising that swelling multiple times for a long time, and another swelling would occur in place of it, which I continued to incise until that condition was prolonged.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	So I took some material and cauterized the swollen area, thus providing additional treatment; then I walked around and did not know what God would do about that situation near me.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter XXXVII.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	On incising a tumor when it is swollen or abscessed.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When catarrh affects the tumor, and it is swollen and elongated, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is in a part that is thick and round, then it is called a bubo.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	However, when it is treated with what we have said in the division, and you do not see improvement in your treatment, and you notice that the swollen area has already diminished and become subtle, then you must incise those that are round and added; and if it extends to a certain length and is bloody, of dark or black color, and is not at the center, then you should attempt the incision, for there is fear for the patient in this condition.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see that part according to the manner I have described regarding its whiteness and length, you should make the patient sit and press his tongue with an instrument whose shape is suitable for this procedure, then place the ounce in the new area, pull it down, and cut it using one of two instruments which are used in the incision of two jaws.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And it is necessary that you do not incise beyond what is adjusted to the natural limit of its addition, for if you incise further, you will hinder their speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And then for the incision, use what we have recommended in the description of two wounds, and care for it until it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the patient was frightened by the incision, it is necessary to use cunning in the cauterization of his fear, and the method of the cautery on him is only with sharp water, and that you place the head of the patient on your lap, then press his tongue with the instrument we have mentioned, then take the water which we have spoken about in the chapter on cauterization, and warm it with that living cause, and hold that not thick nor thin, and fill the concavity of the instrument which has this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Let the extremity of it be concave in which the medicine is placed, like the concavity of a spoon handle, and place the instrument with the medicine on the ulcer, and let the patient lie on their side so that no saliva or mucus from the mouth of that one mixes with the intrinsic medicine, so that it does not descend by any such cause to the throat of the patient and harm them.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	Then take your hand with the medicine and apply it to the uvula for a short period of time until you see it become darkened and calmed by the effect of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take some cloth and wrap it around the end of the reed, then dip the cloth in the medicine, and insert the reed with the cloth into a tube so that the cloth adheres to that tube, and do this as many times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the wound, and then let it be until it dries and falls off after about three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to repeat the medicine, do so, and then for the cauterization, clean around the wound with a cloth dipped in wine, modify that which is around it of the medicine, wash it with cold water, and treat it externally with an embrocation, and internally with enemas until it heals.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this type of treatment is safer than incision and lasts longer in terms of protection.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Sometimes the wound is treated with something more subtle than cauterization and incision, for it is treated by sublimation in this manner: take cinnamon, hyssop, origanum, rue, Arabian saffron, chamomile, fennel, and similar herbs; combine all these ingredients or some of them in a pot, and submerge them in sour wine, allowing them to boil. The pot should be well sealed with appropriate sealing wax, and there should be a hole in the middle of the pot on which is placed a concave instrument made of silver or iron.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And insert the extremity into the mouth of the patient until the vapor reaches the uvula over the tongue, until the uvula is moved or obscured.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And then apply to those dry spots where there are vesicles, and be careful not to perform this treatment at the beginning of the appearance of abscesses, for it would overly exacerbate the abscess, and you should not do that; rather, you must declare the abscess with the cautery.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	And if this instrument is not available to you, then take a reed and attach an eggshell at the end of it, so that the patient's mouth can be cleaned out, for the eggshell prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On the extraction of spines and other foreign objects that adhere in the throat and other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Vesicles or spine fragments adhering in the throat or any other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then you must extract what is visible of those, on which you focus your sight, pressing the tongue with an instrument in front of light, so that what is in the throat becomes clear to you.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And that which does not appear and is hidden in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because by doing this the cause attached to the throat will be expelled through vomiting; or the patient may swallow a piece of raw or cooked lettuce or a piece of dry bread; or take a piece of dried sea sponge, and thoroughly moisten it with honey, and then have the patient swallow that, for when it reaches the place where thorns are lodged and are extracted, they will be expelled.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And also take an eel and thoroughly coat it with honey, place it inside and gently extract it; or take a leek, cut it up, and insert it gently.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	And if they are not expelled by the methods we have mentioned, then use an instrument made of lead according to this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And it should be thicker than a small tube, and at one end, it should have a curvature that you can easily insert into the patient's throat.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And the patient should raise their head up, and be careful not to touch the bones of their throat, so that you do not cause harm and avoid pushing against the bone or spine, or allow anything that the doctor touches with their hand to injure them.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	However, the patient should be more involved, by his knowledge of the location of the adjacent cause and pressing into it, and pulling his hand with the instrument towards it, all of this according to the quantity that is prepared for him inside before being anointed. 
Capitol .xxxix.	Capitol .xxxix.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	Of the extraction of a leech attached to the neck.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When treating a leech with what we have said in the section on treatment with medicines and not by compresses, consider exposing the neck of the patient to the sun, so that you may remove the leech's tongue with the instrument we have recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore, if you find the leech, remove it with a small instrument or with gentle and appropriate movements.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible for you to remove it with that [instrument], then take a concave cannula and insert it into the neck of the patient, and then place a heated iron in the concavity of the cannula, and do this as many times (until the leech is dead and detaches from the neck) and ensure that the patient abstains from water for the entire day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	Then take a vessel full of cold water, open its mouth in that [vessel], and wash the mouth with it; do not let any of it be swallowed and move the water back and forth with your hand for about an hour, because the leech will immediately detach when it feels the water.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	If it is not cured by what we have recommended, then fumigate the patient with camphor or asafetida using the instrument we have described for the fumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, so that it may fall out in four [places].
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And here is the translation of the given text line by line:
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not work, then you repeat the fumigation multiple times, and abstain from drinking for the patient, eat salty and spicy foods, do not drink water, and thus it is necessary that this regimen be followed strictly.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument with which bloodsucking is performed on the throat when it is seen; and it resembles tongs or pincers, but there is some curvature in them:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
Capitol .xl.	Capitol .xl.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the sum of the discourse concerning abscesses and their lancing.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And thus different in puncturing and drying them by two methods, of which one is by the type of abscesses that you insert into; and by this you counteract the humidity.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second method is for the areas where bodily accidents occur, because an abscess in the head is different from an abscess in the buttocks; and an abscess occurring in a fleshy area is different from an abscess occurring in a joint; and each of them has its own judgment by operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And regarding abscesses, some of which should not be punctured until near the maturation of the pus within them or their full development.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment,
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	But you must know the time of the abscess perforation, and this is when it has ripened.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And know that it is mature when there is the cessation of pain and the cessation of fever, then the reduction of heat and pulse, and the sharpness at the head of the abscess, and the other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And when it is necessary that you know the puncture should be made at the lowest point of the abscess and where the pus comes from during the healing of the swelling.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And when puncturing is done through the length of the flesh or body, if the swellings are in the areas of the hands or feet, and in the regions of the veins, cords of nerves, arteries; and finally, in all places where there is no reflection; for in those that do reflect, use puncturing according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	And when the swelling is in a fleshy area, it is better to delay the puncturing until the digestion of it has been confirmed according to the second phase, as we have said; for if you puncture it before this, the corruption of the poor person's body is prolonged and there is much foulness, and the lips of it are hardened and the depth of it increased.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	However, some swellings are punctured according to the width of the flesh or body as needed, or according to what the affected member requires.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And it is necessary to administer a small puncture for small swellings, and in large swellings, a large puncture or multiple incisions according to the diversity of the size of the swellings.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And there are other swellings in which the skin must be depressed and incised; when it is done in such a way that it reaches its limit and remains stable, just as in cases of abscesses and buboes.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that are incised with a section having three angles; and of those which are incised in such a way as the shape of a miter leaf, like the swellings of the ankles.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of those in which round section and crescent section are administered, and similar to those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	And for that which is not like an abscess but rather a superficial lion's swelling, you must pierce it with a superficial puncture or a flat incision only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the abscess is large and has already collected much pus, you should pierce it, and do not worry about extracting all of the pus at once; first extract some of it, then dress the abscess the next day, then extract a larger portion, and continue doing this several times according to progression until it is fully drained.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And especially if the patient is of weak constitution, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old person in decline, because the animal spirit often dissolves with the discharge of pus, and the patient may die quickly, and you must treat them accordingly.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Pay close attention to this chapter with great caution. When you perform the puncture on these abscesses, make sure to clean the wounds and then assess whether the wound of the abscess is small or flat. In such cases, apply ointments made from lead or old cat (possibly meaning a type of fat). If the abscess is large and the fissures from the puncture are many, you must place a plug in each channel until they heal together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the abscess a part of the chain (possibly referring to a series of abscesses or a structure within) is separated or you have hollowed that area around its circumference, then you must compress it with old fat or a thread made from lead cloth, just as when you extract plants or roots, keeping them moist; secure that for three days; and then process it and cure it with the appropriate ointments until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	When there is bleeding during your operation, then you should administer cold water and sweet wine in which a cloth has been soaked, and place that over the area of bleeding repeatedly.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	And if the flow of blood persists, then you must administer treatment and cure, and use powders which I have recommended in various places of this our book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	And if it is during winter time, and the location of the abscess is where cold nerves are, then you should infuse pillows with wine and hot oil, and place those on the affected areas.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is summer and the places are fleshy, then you must place poultices soaked in water and oil or in wine and oil, and all of this should be rubbed for up to three days, as we have said, and then you must open the abscess, clean it out, and administer whatever treatment is necessary until it is healed.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the treatment of abscesses in general, but according to the method of distinction, I have already spoken of each abscess individually in separate chapters regarding its specific cure.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XLII.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Of the section of abscesses which come upon the nape of the neck.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	On the nape of the neck, small abscesses appear, and they are similar to nodes that contain tunics which are their structure; and their nature is like particles.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And from them come discharges, and those contain moisture similar to slime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And from those contain moisture similar to pus, and they resemble stones; and from those come the stony ones, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all and in the extraction of those there is no fear, because the extraction of those does not cause any harm to the arteries.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in the section of those is that you express them with an instrument whose form is suitable for this, which is called a probe, until you know what it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	For if what it contains is moisture, then you should divide it by making a longitudinal incision according to this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And it begins in the section of the line B within the line G. Thus as the humidity is evacuated, you then scrape that skin which contains that moisture, and do not leave any cause behind, for gouts return frequently if some cause remains.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then immerse a cloth in Egyptian ointment if it is available, and if not, in water and salt; and fill the wound with that and leave it inside for another day, because with this you corrode everything that is rotten from that membrane.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then apply the Egyptian ointment to that cloth a second and third time if necessary, until you are confident that there is no rot left from that membrane; then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if the abscess contains fatty lumps, then you should incise it in the following manner:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	using a section in the shape of a cross, and insert your finger between the two edges of the incision and scrape it thoroughly from all sides, and apply your strength to extract the membrane that contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	But if your initial approach meets resistance, then do what I am about to tell you first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly, perform the incision and treatment on a calcified abscess as I have instructed you; an incision on a calcified abscess is lighter, because it has little blood and moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And sometimes these kinds of swellings which are on the head in some people with whom it is not all humidity; the cause is that I incised upon a swelling on the head of an old woman and found the swelling as hard as a stone, rough, white, which could not be crushed, and if one were to strike it, it would hurt.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	But in other swellings or accidents in the head which are not part of this chapter, such as swellings that come to the heads of children and should be treated at the roots of the ears, but the section of these all is a surface treatment.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And stop the perforation of those in the lower part so that the body is relieved of the pus in the lower areas.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And then treat those with whatever is appropriate for that treatment.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	On the section of scrofula which occurs in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Various swellings can lead to these abscesses in the neck and armpits; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck are various swellings that develop between them, and all of these scrofula are within their own specific layer, just as in the knots and abscesses of the head, as we have described.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the types of these scrofula are various, for some are stony, some contain moisture, and some are malignant and do not respond to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, in the one that you find to be well situated upon examination, where the color of what is apparent is close to the color of the swelling, and it is soft throughout, and not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the arteries, and is not hard, you should incise that with a superficial cut from the upper part to the lower part of the body along a line of about 6 units within a line of about 2 units, and scrape it thoroughly, and extend both sides of the swelling with forceps, or with several forceps if you need them, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract that bit by bit.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more cautious that neither the vein nor the nerve be cut.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And let the spatula not be too sharp, so that it does not hurt your hand upon incision, or disturb the patient, and cut what is not necessary to cut; for if you were to cut a vein or artery and stop your operation, then apply powdered vitriol or other powders which stop blood flow, bind up the wound, and leave within what alleviates the sharpness of the abscess so that the wound may be softened and begin to rot.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is congealed.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Then return to your operation until it is completed.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then use your index finger to check if there is any cause of the other small scrophules, then cut those and clean them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if there is a large vein at the root of the scrophule, it is now necessary that you do not cut the scrophule from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Before it is necessary to tie that with strong folded cloth and let that stay inside which falls by itself, causing no harm.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the wound with old cataplasm which you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then treat it thus.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you incise that scrophula entirely, then you must bring together the two edges of the wound and suture it immediately so that there is no remaining excess material.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that there is excess material due to the size of the scrophula, you must understand how to incise the root of it, remove it, and administer the suture as mentioned.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for those scrophulas that contain moisture, pierce it with a superficial puncture where you see the site of maturation, and make a puncture to drain the pus at the base of it, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then administer a puncture, using cautery and ointments similar to those, so that it corrodes the remaining corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And then when you see the wound already cleansed, you must treat it with an ointment of flesh-generating properties until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Capitol .xliii.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Of the incision of the pus pocket resulting from an abscess in the armpit.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients described this incision in the armpit, and I have not seen anyone in our land perform such a procedure.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the speech of those [individuals]. 
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	And in men with hernias, the extraction of the epididymis must be avoided, because by doing this no harm is caused since all the veins and the larger ones of the patient are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	And in those who have abscesses caused in the mouth or throat or both ears, when the illness is not in the bone, it is necessary to incise from the section of the epiglottis to avoid the destruction that is caused by perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, when we want to do this, we must cut three circles around the epilhot [inguinal hernia], or four small sections across its width within two of these circles, ensuring that the incision is made in the membrane, not in the cartilage, and this location is suitable for cutting because it lacks flesh and the blood vessels are few.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is inexperienced, it is necessary to stretch the tendon of the ankle with force, and then cut the tendon until it reaches the canal, but avoid the blood vessels if you see any reason to do so.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	Then make the incision on the membrane as we have recommended; it is indicated over the section of the canal by the flame-like appearance that comes from the part that has been disrupted and by the discontinuity of the sound.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Therefore, when the time is unfavorable for a perforation to be feared, bring together the edges of the wound's tendon, and sew them with just the cartilage. 
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow where healing is needed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Albuquasis says that the essence of the sermon we have recounted is that some of those abscesses have blocked the windpipe of the patient, and the patient has come near to death, and their breath is cut off, and some proceed to incise the epiglottis so that the patient may breathe through the site of the wound with some respiration and be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And by this, the wound should be left open until the maliciousness of the disease is consumed; and this maliciousness lasts for three days; and then afterwards, the wound should be closed, and it should be cared for until it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen in my practice is that a servant took a knife and inserted it into her throat and cut a part of the windpipe with it, and I was called for her treatment, and I found her moaning as one near death, and upon discovering the wound, I found blood that had seeped from the small wound.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore, I must confess that she had not cut any vein or artery, and the air was coming out of the wound, and she bandaged it until it healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And it does not affect the servant if there is no change in their voice, and then after some days they return to the improvement of their conditions.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that in the section of the hernia there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	The text you've provided seems to be in an
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	When dealing with an abscess that occurs outside the throat area, and is called a hernia of the throat. 
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This type of swelling called a groin hernia is a large swelling according to the body's color, and it occurs in women. 
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it happens in two ways, for it can be either natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural case, there is no need to cure it.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental occurs in two ways: one resembles fatty nodes, and the other way resembles an abscess, which is caused by arterial obstruction, and fear is associated with it.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And one should not apply pressure with an iron unless it is for the smaller one.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you should probe it and examine it with your finger. If you find it resembling fatty nodes and it is not suspended by any veins, then incise it as you would for nodes, and extract it along with what contains the membrane and bursa; otherwise, thoroughly investigate its entire nature, and then treat the area with appropriate treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLV.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	On the incision of various types of nodes.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	About the different types of nodes; I have already described all their types in the division [section].
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And it is necessary that I recount thus the difference between a knot and a hernia as if there were doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore, I say that with an inflammation there is heat and fever and strong pains within until the boiling of the excess subsides; and it is a complete corruption from which the fever, pain, and heat cease.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	Thus, with a nodule, there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains a kind of substance that is in a sack by itself.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it depends on the color of the body, and its beginning is like a seed and forms in such a way as a vein, whether larger or smaller, and they are of two types: dry or fatty, containing moisture, and the colors of the moisture vary, as I have described in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you reach the treatment of a nodule, you must remove it and trace it back to its origin using a method called intromission, as its form will be described in the chapter that follows this one.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And it is the method for investigating abscesses and all nodules, which involves taking this instrument and inserting it into the most moist part you find in the abscess. You will stir the contents with that instrument little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated the core.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And then adjust your hand according to the size of the swelling, and then extract the foreign matter and consider what has been left in the wound.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the flowing moisture, of whatever color it may be, is not expelled, then you incise it with a superficial cut as I have said in other swellings.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no moisture left in the wound from the foreign matter, then you know that it is pus.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And dry it with a cut in the shape of a cross, following this pattern:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	As you have been taught, suspend it with rings, and unbind the bandage from all sides easily, and protect the skin or sack, if possible, over that and extract the wound discharge with the knot.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to extract that discharge, and sometimes because of this, you must remove it in pieces to ensure nothing remains inside.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	For if any of it remains, whether little or much, the knot will return accordingly.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that a small part remains from it, then fill the wound with some sharp and strong corrosive powders and clean the wound, and place over that which has become an abscess a cautery, and treat that with other treatments until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if the swelling is large, then sew the two edges of it together and treat that with something that promotes flesh growth.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	But if the pulse is contrary, or non-pulsating, then cut and fill the area with something like trissat which is vitriol, and leave that in place for two or three days until the wound dries out and the blood swelling subsides; then return to cutting what remains of the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLVI.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	On the forms of instruments necessary for section and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Concerning the forms of the instruments for insertion, which are of three types: some are large, some are medium, and some are small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large instrument is as follows:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The method of midwifery is as follows:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of introducing something small is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	Here is the translation of the given line:
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of the experts, and they are called albedi, and one of them is called berid.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And from three spices, for among them are wheat, barley, and a little [amount of something else].
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of experiencing great, form of it:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of experienced midwife, form of it:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of a brief experience, form of it:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It seems that this text is written in a mixture of medieval languages, likely influenced by Latin and some Romance languages. Here's my attempt at translating the given sentence into English:
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And in this way, make circles, large ones, like big needles with which saddles are sewn, and they are made of citrus wood, or wood or iron, or silver, and the best ones are those made of citrus wood.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And the experiments are made with black feathers, which they recall for opening the fistulas in their cavities where reflections occur, that are reflected by their light with those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And of these three types, some are long, others medium, and others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and the stricture. 
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Form of the large lead weight:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Form of the experienced midwife with lead:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Form of the small lead instrument:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the tumors are of various types, for among them are some simple ones, which have only one curvature, and they are of three types: large, small, and medium.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And from these are born worms, and they come in three types. 
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of those hooks having two curves, and they come in three types. 
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And since they have three curvatures, and are of three types.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all of these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	It seems like the text is providing instructions or describing something in an old language that mixes elements from Latin and Romance languages.
Forma de unci simple migier:	The phrase "Forma de unci simple migier" seems to be in an old
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	The phrase "Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:" appears to be in an archaic or constructed language
Forma de unci orp gran:	The phrase "Forma de unci orp gran" seems to be in a language
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	The phrase "Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:" appears to be in an archaic or constructed language that
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	The phrase "Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:" seems to be in an archaic or constructed language that
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	The phrase "Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas" appears to be in an archaic or constructed language
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	The phrase "Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas" seems to be in an archaic or constructed language that
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	The phrase "Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas" seems to be in an archaic or constructed language that
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the scalpels with which knots and abscesses are cut and squeezed, and they are of three types, for there is a large one, a medium one, and a small one.
Forma de scapel gran:	Forma de scapel gran:
Forma del scapel migier:	Forma del scapel migier:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Forma de scapel pauc:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The extremities that are used for making a section are sharp, and the other extremities are not sharp, and they are not placed in such a manner to simply rest, but rather so that there can be a quick action during the lancing of the nodes, avoiding incision into a vein or nerve, and through this, the patient is healed and finds some tranquility from the heat obtained by the lancing of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of almagidas, and they are of three types: large, medium, and small, as you will see.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of the large magda:
Forma de magda migier:	Form of the medium magda:
Forma de magda pauc:	Form of the small magda:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They should be made from barley and resemble the grain from which alcohol is made.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it is at the sharp end that should be pricked with a hidden spatula and in that area, you can reach both the internal and external parts when you want to, as you see fit.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spatimis, which are hidden between the fingers causing the perforation of abscesses and which the patients do not feel, and they come in three species: large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of cupping with which the flow of blood is interrupted, and there are three types; large, medium, and small; the forms of it:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut, e sian subtils.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And it is necessary that these varieties of cupping be large, medium, and small, so that through them you can quickly remove blood flow when needed, and then when first there is no medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use those for bleeding in all parts of the body, and only use them on fleshy areas, such as on the creases of the chest and thighs, and in the creases of the arms, and around the breasts and abdomen and knees, and similar fleshy moist creases.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And sometimes these instruments are made in other small forms similar to scissors according to this shape; by which the blood is cut off when it is done through phlebotomy or proper incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes circles are made according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	On the treatment of men's breasts that resemble women's.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Sometimes the breasts of some men become swollen due to the softness caused by sleep, and then their breasts swell and resemble women's breasts, becoming pendulous and loose.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And for the one who wishes to correct this, you must incise those areas with a lunar section according to this form, from line B to line G, and then extract all the excess flesh, and then apply a wound-healing medication to the area, and then suture the two edges of the wound together, and care for it until it is healed.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the breast droops to its sides and is softened due to its size, similar to how it happens in women, then it should be divided into two parts at their highest points with two incisions resembling a lunar shape, each contained within the other by the end of each one so that the larger line contains the smaller one according to this form from line B to line G. Then remove the chain that is between the two edges of the wound and eliminate the excess fat, and administer what we have said about suturing and powders as necessary for healing until it is healed.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the incision of that which needs to be cut due to the restlessness of the patient and bleeding, then it is necessary to fill the wound with some substance submerged in a corrosive ointment and leave it there so that it corrodes what is rotten of the flesh, and then treat it until it heals.
Capitol .xlviii.	It seems like you've provided a section or chapter title from
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	Here is the translation of the provided text:
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These swellings that come from a kind of scrofula species, hard ones, which contain a sac-like skin.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And of those which contain humidity; and those which contain humidity must be incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from the line G to the line B. And when all that is evacuated from the abscess of the pus, then fill it with old felt and clean the inside on the next day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And then the wound should be sutured and treated with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess is from the glands of the lymph nodes and the scrophulas, then you should incise it in the same way we have described in the section about scrophulas.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	And if the plague has spread to the point of putrefaction, then apply a cautery as we have previously described.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLIX.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	On the section of abscesses that occur due to arteries or veins.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an artery is ruptured and the clot that forms over it becomes solidified, a spotted abscess may occur. The signs by which it is known whether inflammation and abscess are due to an artery or vein: for when the abscess is caused by an artery, it extends in a long line along the course of the body; and when you press on the abscess with your fingers, you feel a wheezing sound within.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is due to veins appears round on the surface of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And to incise on this swelling is an error, especially in those areas near the armpits, the knees, the neck, and many other parts of the body; it is indeed serious, therefore its treatment with iron must be avoided, and that which is in the extremities or head should also be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	And for those cases where the vein is swollen due to inflammation of the orifice of the artery, make a longitudinal incision along the cord; then carefully open the incision with forceps and expose the artery, freeing it from the surrounding tunics so that it is uncovered.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	Then place the needle and make it penetrate to the other side, and tie the artery with double thread in two places — this method is what I have taught you for the extraction of two arteries that are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	Then use a spatula to separate the area between two ligaments so that all the blood within is released and the swelling is dissolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then administer treatment in which pus is generated between where the ligaments are placed; and then treat it with appropriate ointments until it is healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if the abscess is due to vein constriction, then you must hold with your hand as much of the abscess as possible with a bandage, and then insert the needle into the area where your hand has been, making it penetrate; and do this by threading the double thread through until you pull it out from the other side, and then tie off the abscess with a secure ligature as I have said to you in the ligature method using two parts with both ends of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	But if you fear that the thread might be pulled out, then insert the thread with that needle throughout the abscess from the tip of the needle first, and tighten the threads at four points.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then dry the abscess at its midpoint until what is inside it is removed; then you cut away the excess of the bandage and leave what is tied.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then place over it a pillow that you have soaked in wine and oil, and then administer the treatment made with plasters and ointments until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Capitulate the abscess which you encounter due to nerve twisting.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Here is the translation line by line:
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And the incision is made in the areas of the instep or the ankle, or in any place where the joints are painful.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a severe abscess, and its color resembles that of the rest of the body, and it occurs in the more prominent parts of the body where such conditions are predisposed, and when it becomes tight with intensity, the patient appears to be in a state of stupor.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not an abscess aggregated in the groin of the body, and therefore the chain is left alone, and it swells all over without moving to the front or back parts.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, of those that are in the joints, it is not necessary to wrap them with iron, for fear that they will result in contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	But if it is on the head or forehead, treat the swelling with a spatum (a type of instrument).
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	But if it is a small abscess, then take hold of it with forceps and remove it entirely.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then suspend it with an incision, and drain it, and then clean the area; sew up the wound, and care for it until it heals.
Capitol .li.	Chapter II.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	From the section about the abscess which you encounter on the cheek that occurs in the abdomen.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Here is the translation line by line from the provided text:
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have seen one, and in its belly were two parts which resembled mushrooms more than anything else, and there was no difference between those white, small structures.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And already the lips of those were turned inside out and split open, and moisture was flowing from them all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore, I incised them and found one about eighteen inches in length and the other about six inches.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation in incising it is that you consider whether the patient is moist, and the color of the tissue is white, moist, of subtle texture; then you incise it with a broad spatula, and have cauteries ready over the fire, for small bits of coagulated blood must be expelled from the cut; and if the blood flows, cauterize that area.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if you find the patient pale and fearful, beware of incision with iron; but instead take fresh lead plaster, and apply it with that material in the manner we have described; and leave that on for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Then apply to the constriction with the lead wire; thus, do not stop applying the large lead until it is severed and falls off by itself.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	But if the growth is large, then there is reason for fear and dread in the incision of it, especially when it is in the abdomen.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	But it is possible that you can cut away half of it, and then cauterize the area so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	Then treat it until the wound is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And be careful not to presume to incise a growth that is of dark color, with little sensation, and of low regard, for that is truly cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I come to recall cancer in relation to this.
Capitol .lii.	Capitol .lii.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	For the given line "De curacio de eminencia del umbilic," based on the linguistic elements from medieval
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then the situation differs greatly from what we have described before. As you press that area with your fingers, it becomes hidden, and then returns; and when it comes out forcefully, the movement greatly increases at the entrance of the bath and with intense effort.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	But if it is due to moisture, then it swells and does not hide when you press with your hand, nor is it constrained, nor is it hardened.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is due to blood, then with these signs the abscess appears with a declining black color.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	But if it is due to soft flesh, then the abscess is heavy, thick, and hard, and it is embedded according to a certain amount.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	But if it is due to wind (gas), then touching it causes swelling.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation on it is such that you consider whether the prominence of the navel is due to arterial blood, or venous blood, or gas; then you must abstain from treating it, for there is fear and dread as I have taught in the chapter where I spoke about abscesses caused by arterial and venous blood.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine or the membrane, then you must order the patient to have his belly bare and lie down extended; then examine with a probe around the entire navel, then command him to stay in such a way that your hands are over his back; then encircle with a spatula around the navel at the place where you probed with the tent; then extend half of the abscess upwards by an inch; then bandage it around with strong plaster or wax and apply the method of bandaging properly.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And then press the middle of the abscess extended over the membrane and insert your finger into that area to find the intestine; and if you have found or seen it through the membrane, now you pull quickly and push the intestine back into the abdominal parts.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found the tissue, then take it with your fingers; and cut away its excess parts.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	And if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then circle that area, and then proceed with your operation; take two needles and insert into them two strong threads and place the two needles in the circle you have made around the abscess in a crosswise manner, making sure they penetrate; then grasp the abscess in four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you want, remove the needles and allow the area within for the extended flesh to rot and fall off by itself; or incise that which has become thin and can be scraped away, and then treat it with whatever ointments are necessary until it is healed.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the prominence of the navel is due to flesh or moisture, then you must hollow out the abscess as we have said and drain the blood or moisture that you find there, and then treat it with whatever is necessary so that the area consolidates and heals.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter LIII.
De curacio de cranc.	On the treatment of hernia.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already discussed, in the division, the types of hernia and in what manner it is treated with medicines, and that it is advisable to treat it with iron so that it does not become ulcerated; we have also mentioned a hernia generated in the groin and the caution required for its treatment.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancients said that sometimes cancer is in places where it is possible to eradicate it, such as when it is in the breasts or in the thigh and similar parts of the body allocated for extraction of all of it, especially when it starts small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it is old and large, one should not attempt to treat it, for I have not been able to cure any from this, nor have I seen others who have succeeded in doing so.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation on it is when it is located as we have said, that you precede by leaving the patient and purging them of black bile several times, and then incise it if a clear swelling is found.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient with preparations in which they are placed for the operation, and then scrape away all the growths that need to be removed; and then hollow out from all sides with a sharp surgical hook until no root of it remains.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the blood flow, and do not cut it lightly, and squeeze the areas, and clean all the thick blood thoroughly with your hand or with an appropriate instrument.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If there is an obstruction of thick blood in a vein or artery, then cauterize that area until the flow of blood has ceased, and then treat it with another form of cure until it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	It seems like you've provided a section
De curacio de ydropici.	On the treatment of dropsy.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already recounted, in the division, of the types of water-related dropsy, and the signs of each type, as well as the treatment with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured with iron is only the type of dropsy called althitas, and it is not treated with iron for the type of timpanists or the type of yposarcha, because that would be fatal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have already treated this type of dropsy in timpanists with medicines and your treatment does not yield results, then consider, because if the patient has already become weak, or is affected by another illness such as another form of dropsy, like those affecting the lungs or abdomen similar to these, then beware lest you treat them with iron, for there is fear concerning this.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	But if you find the patient to be of strong vitality, and they are only affected by dropsy and nothing else, and they are neither a child nor an elderly person, then the method of operating on them is that you lift the patient between your hands, and another assistant squeezes their abdomen with their hand, pushing the water towards the area near the navel, and then take a spiny spatula according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider if the generation of dropsy is due to the intestines, because at this time you must move away from the navel by the length of three fingers towards the area below, along the right side toward the pelvic region.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	And if the generation of dropsy is due to illness in the liver, then your incision should be three fingers to the left of the navel.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of it is due to the spleen, then your incision should be on the right side. 
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And it is not necessary for your incision to be on the side on which the patient wishes to lie, so that the superfluities do not run to that place freely.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then perforate the entire chain with the instrument, and insert into that section, and elevate your hand with the spatula between the chain and the siphon, and you extract it; and if it is the amount of a fingernail or so.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then pierce the skull so that the spatula reaches the empty space, which is where the fluid is located.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then extract that and insert an instrument of which this is the form:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	It resembles a thin silver tube; it is made of silver or iron or lion brass, at the lower end of which there is a small slot, and on the sides of it are three slots: two on one side and one on the other side; and the tip of it is cut in the manner of a pen, just as you see:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the upper end of it is a ring, so that when the instrument reaches the fluid, you immediately place this on the instrument, thus evacuating only a small amount of water, for if you evacuate more than necessary in an hour, the patient may die from the resolution of their animal spirit, or you risk bringing about suffocation which approaches death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	However, evacuate that according to the quantity of the patient's strength and according to what is indicated to you by the condition of the patient, the strength of their pulse, and their overall health.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And then extract the instrument, and hold back the water which is held in place by the chain that holds the nozzle which is on the syringe through which you puncture it in that manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then repeat the procedure on another day if the patient can tolerate it, and extract a small quantity of water, and do this for several days in succession, and be careful not to make a mistake until only a little water remains.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	And if you fear for the patient, and leave a large quantity of water remaining, then treat that with burial in hot sand, induce sweating in a bath, and expose to the sun for a long time; and treat that with drying medicines until healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize over the stomach, and the spleen and the liver near the extraction of the water, as I have recounted in what precedes.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter LV.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	On the treatment of children who are born with unperforated urinary openings.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Sometimes some of the children are born from their mother's womb with their urinary opening not perforated (or it is very narrow or not in its proper place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, it is necessary to treat with perforation of the area as soon as it is born using a fine and subtle spatula in the following manner:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then place in the wound a thin lead wire and tie it there, and leave it for three days or four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when he wants to urinate, let him be turned and placed in a position to urinate; then return him to his original position.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not hold the tube, it is possible that the urine flowing over the area will not clear this spot.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	But for those in whom the passage is narrow, it should be treated with a lead dilator, as we have said, for several days until it is widened.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	But for those in whom the passage is not in its proper place, as mentioned, the cause is that they are born with the tube deviated at the end of the head of the penis, so they cannot urinate properly unless they lift the penis upward with their hand; and this does not allow for proper generation, because the sperm cannot reach the mother correctly, leading to a significant illness.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the method of the operation is that the patient should be placed face down on their back, and then extend the head of the penis with your left hand using strong traction, and incise the tip of the penis at the frenulum with a sharp spatula, as if cutting the quill of a feather, or shave some part so that the middle becomes similar to the head of the penis and the passage falls into its proper place as required.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And be careful in your operation for blood flow, when you often encounter this; and apply yourself to it so that you stop the bleeding, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Capitol .lvi.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Of a condition that affects the foreskin at the head of the penis, and involves corruption, blackening, and adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	White spots appear with this condition on the penis, and it is an elevation of soft flesh.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And of those, one is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	For non-malignant [condition], you must suspend it with a fine thread and cut within so that the entire area is treated; then apply a piece of cloth soaked in Egyptian ointment over it; afterward, treat it with diafine ointment until it heals.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the condition is malignant and of a leathery color, then you must apply a cautery near its beginning and root.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	If the condition is on the foreskin of the uncircumcised penis head, and one part of the condition is inside the foreskin while the other part is outside, then you must remove the part of the condition that is inside at its beginning until it is stabilized; then treat the external part, because when you treat both simultaneously with the foreskin, it is not guaranteed that it will not be torn.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And we have examined accidents in the genitals and in the foreskin blackening and corruption; therefore, you must hollow out everything that is already blackened and what is about to corrupt or is already corrupted; then line it with honey over that which has been damaged, mixed with flour from ground pomegranate rind and crushed and sifted almonds.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And then treat that area with another cure until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	And if there is a flow of blood, then administer a lunar cautery according to this method:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	For a beneficial cautery serves two purposes at once, that is, for a flow of blood and for the plague when it is corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the penis is corroded and completely destroyed, then you must insert a lead catheter into the foreskin so that the patient can urinate through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adherence does not occur except in those whose foreskin is tight, and where circumcision is not required; and when adherence occurs due to an infection or an abscess), you must gently separate them using a blunt spatula until the bond dissolves and the head of the penis is completely released.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to distinguish those precisely, then you must gently separate some of the cause from the head of the penis and the foreskin. This is because the foreskin, when it is thin, can be easily and slightly perforated due to its delicacy.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a sharp instrument that has already been soaked in cold water so that they do not stick together again.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then it should be treated with a styptic agent until it is healed.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter LVII.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	On the cleansing of children and the treatment of what may occur in those who undergo circumcision.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution to discontinuity like other wounds; however, since it is part of our procedure and our will, and it is properly performed on children, it is necessary to perform this better operation in the easiest way possible without losing sight of health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books because it was not used in their laws; rather, we have acquired it through experience. This is why I have found most artisans and surgeons to use circumcision and cleansing with a novacula and forceps; they also use bandages with honey and anointing with oil.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And with the cleansing which is performed by catheters, and it is digital, of which barbers use, the incision at the end of the male member is not safeguarded, for fear that it might enter too deeply.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	And in the operation with a nail, if you forcefully use iron, you will spoil your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the umbilical cord of the child is short by nature, and often it is born in such a way that no modification is necessary, and I have seen this.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	More about the cleaning that is done with scissors and suturing with thread, goodness, my experience shows me, because the scissors are of proportional incision, for which reason the sharpness on top is the same as the sharpness underneath; and thus when you press your hand according to two proportional sharpnesses, and cut accordingly in a balanced manner at once; and the compression of the thread is done with a figure containing the chain of the suture from all sides, with which no error occurs.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	The method of the first operation is that you should keep the child mostly still if they are one of those who understand a little, so that you only tie the thread in its place, and leave it there until the next day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	Then make the patient happy in every way that is possible for you, so that they receive comfort and understanding.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	Then have the child sit between your hands properly prepared, and do not be careless; hide the scissors in your hand or under your foot so that the child does not see them or any of the other instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then insert your hand into the penis and blow into the tube, and pull it inside so that the head of the penis is seated, and then clean it from whatever filth has been added to it.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then mark the area with a double layer of wax, and place another smaller ligature below it, and then with your finger press and indicate the site of the ligature firmly, and incise between the two ligatures.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then lift the tube slightly and extract the head of the penis; and let the blood flow little by little, for it is better; and sprinkle powder over it, and place a cloth soaked in egg white mixed with warm oil on top of the powder; and leave that on until the next day; and treat it with treatment until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The form of the scissors for modification is as follows:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	Let one part of the scissors be untrimmed and the other part trimmed, so that the nail's edge is not exposed, and let the length of the two sharp ends be equal to the length of two equally sized handles.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	And the error in purification is that you completely or partly avoid the intrinsic chain of it, you should incise.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, you must stretch that area of your time with your nail before the swelling of the place and incise that according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then extract that with tweezers and incise that.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	And if three days have passed, and the swelling remains beneath the foreskin as an abscess, then you should wait until the abscess ripens, and then easily incise it according to your preparation.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And be careful of the head of the penis, for it should not be affected by that.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And thus treat it with what consolidates the wound, using the powders which we have mentioned in the section on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is incised too much on the scrotum and you follow the areas above it, this should not harm him.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And furthermore, treat it with what we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter LVIII.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to stones or frozen blood, or gravel, or flesh growths, and similar to those we have discussed regarding methods of treatment in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved and there is retention due to a stone that is already in the neck of the bladder, then the patient must be bent over their knees.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And then position the feet of that person on their back and extend their belly from the part above their back, and the patient holds their arm as much as is possible for them.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Therefore, when the neck of the bladder is forced to expel the stone towards the back areas, urine is released.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it is not dissolved by what we have said and the cause becomes very intense for the patient, then you must administer extraction from him using an instrument called a syringe, of which this is the form: It should be made of silver and its tube should be thin like a bird's quill with subtlety in length similar to one and a half palms, at whose end there should be a fine nozzle.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the method of urine extraction is as follows: take folded linen and tie it tightly at one end with good binding; insert the ends of the linen into the opening of the catheter, and cut off any excess material from the linen with scissors if necessary, but forcefully insert it into the tube. Then attach the catheter with glue and egg white.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And place the patient on the bed, and wash their bladder and penis with moist herbs, olive oil, and warm water.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then insert the catheter easily until it reaches the tip of the penis; and then bend the penis upwards at the junction of the pubic bone; and then push the catheter further into that area; and then continue pushing it until it reaches the bladder, which should cause the patient to feel that it has reached the intended location. If not done in this order, the instrument may go astray due to tortuosity (twisting).
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then slowly extend the thread with the wool little by little, for the urine will soak the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Then remove it and perform the urine therapy, using a catheter; do not stop doing this until the bladder is evacuated and the patient finds relief.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter .59.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	On the quality of cleansing the bladder with clamped instruments and similar tools that are appropriate for this procedure.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When you encounter ulcers or abscesses in the bladder, or congealed blood, or blocked pus, and you wish to instill water and medicines into it, then use an instrument called a clampcedra, and this is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	And here is the translation of the given line:
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that way three wounds are made: two from one side, thus as you cut. 
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning is the concave space in which what is expelled resides, and according to its quantity it obstructs that place; except when some cause pulls out from the moisture, it is drawn out, and when it is expelled, along with that it is pulled out, and when it is expelled for a long time, similar to how incense is made with naphtha in naval battles.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, if you want to draw out moisture from the bladder, insert the tip of a catheter into the moisture, and pull with that what is pushed up towards the upper parts, for the moisture is drawn into the cavity of the catheter.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	Then insert the tip of the catheter into the urethra as we have recommended in the circumcision; then push the moisture with what you are pushing, for that moisture reaches the bladder immediately, and the patient feels it.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The form of the catheter used to catheterize the bladder is as follows:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it should be made of silver or brass, with the tip resembling a small feather, and leave a hollow canal inside.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	Then take the bladder of an animal, and place in it the moisture you want to introduce into the bladder, and then tie it tightly with a double thread at both ends, and heat that moisture over fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	Then insert the tip of the catheter into the urethra.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then press your hand on the bladder with moisture, applying firm pressure so that the patient feels that this moisture has already reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	And if the bladder is not present, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle out of it; pierce that completely around its circumference; then insert strong wax into those holes so that it is turned around; then add the circle as you would add an ointment, so that you can place it in the moisture, oils, and waters that you want.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then attach it to the instrument and use it in the same way you would with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter 60.
De extraccio de peyra.	On the extraction of stones.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already discussed in the division the types of stones and their treatment with medicines, and the difference between stones formed in the kidneys and those formed in the bladder, and the signs of those.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have mentioned the stone in which the operation with hand, and incision, is performed.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that which is fixed in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And I narrate it with clear exposition and abbreviation.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Thus it is said that the stone generated in the bladder mostly affects children; and among its signs is that the urine excreted from the bladder resembles water in its subtlety, and appears sandy; and the patient scratches his penis, and sometimes feels pain, and then it becomes erect; and with this you know the truth of these matters.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And surgery is the treatment for children of that age who have reached fourteen years; and it is a difficult treatment in older individuals.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	However, in younger individuals, it may be treated with this method because they are among those who can recover.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And for the one in whom the stone is larger, the treatment is more difficult; and if it is small, it is contrary to that [approach].
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Thus, when we come to the treatment of this condition, we begin by cleansing the patient with catheters that extract all the pus present in their intestines; for that pus often prevents the discovery of the stone during examination.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then the patient is taken by their feet and shaken and jolted gently so that the stone descends into the neck of the bladder, or jumps from place to place several times.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then apply that ointment between your hands prepared, and the patient's hands should hold onto their own body parts, so that the bladder is entirely made to incline towards the lower regions. 
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then wash that area and all of it externally. 
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Therefore, if you feel a stone in the space, then you should immediately address it with incision over it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you do not fully remove your touch from it, then you must anoint with oil your left index finger if the patient is a child, or your middle finger if they are a young adult, and insert that into their anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And you need to remove the stone that is beneath your finger.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And slowly insert it into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	Then press on it with your finger and expel it from the area where you made the incision.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the attendant to press the bladder with their hand; and command another attendant to extend the testicles upward with their right hand, and with their other hand pull the skin that is below the testicles, towards the area where the incision is made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then insert a sharp and slender instrument, which has the following form:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And divide what is between the buttocks and the thighs, not in the middle, but rather towards the left side; and make the incision over that stone with your finger placed at the buttock, and let the incision be transverse so that the external part of the cut is wide and the internal narrow according to how much the stone protrudes from inside as possible, and not more, because by compressing your finger which is in the buttock against the stone, it facilitates the extraction.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that there are some stones which have angles and edges, making the extraction difficult because of this.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And among them, there is one that resembles a grain, which is round, and its extraction is easy.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Therefore, if it has angles and edges, position it in the fissure.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not easily extracted, then you must apply force to it, or press on it appropriately with a tool whose end resembles a file that you use to press on the stone, without slipping off it; or insert beneath it a delicate instrument with a curved end.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	And if you cannot do that, then widen the wound slightly, and if you see blood flow, cut it off firmly with powdered vitriol.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	And if the stone is more than one, then at the beginning you press your hand to the mouth of the bladder, and then incise over it; and then push a small one near that; and similarly act if there are more than two stones.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the stone is very large, then it is ignorance to incise with a large cut, for you cause one of two things to happen to the patient: either they die or they become subject to continuous urine dripping, because the area is not fully healed.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	But administer the expulsion of what is stuck inside, or use tweezers to extract it in pieces from the fracture.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	So when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with pieces of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen it thus.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place over it a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in roasted oil and warm water, so that any swelling may be softened.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And then recline the patient on their side, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when you have loosened that area, wash the place with water and some oil, then treat it with diafaric ointment and diaphoretic ointment until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	And if in the wound an abscess occurs, which is hard and corrosive, and of such appearance as if the blood were frozen within the bladder, thereby obstructing urination (and this is known by the discharge of blood with urine), then insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will cause corruption of the bladder and putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then wash the wound with sweet wine, water, and salt, and with opposition to all species [meaning likely some form of antiseptic or contrasting treatment], with whatever is appropriate for his cure until he is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And it is necessary throughout the entire treatment that you keep both thighs apart and apply the medicines which are placed on the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and is in the meat of the penis, and it is embedded in it, and urine flow is obstructed, then treat it with what I recommend before resorting to surgery, because many times this condition is wrongly accused of needing surgery; and now I have expressed this, which is that you should take an oiled iron probe, which has the following form:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	with a triangular tip, sharp, attached to a handle.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And then take some wax, and coat the penis with it where the stone was to prevent it from returning to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then insert the iron into the penis, piercing with ease until the probe reaches the stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And rotate the perforator with your hand on that small stone little by little, and you pierce the puncture so that what is inside can be penetrated from the other side; for the urine is immediately released.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then press your hand on what are the stones of the bladder outside the penis, because those are constricted, and they are flushed out with urine, and the patient is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	And if this treatment is not suitable for you due to some reason that prohibits you from doing it, then apply a plaster below the stone, and another plaster above the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then apply a incision over the stone on that penis between two bindings.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then extract it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then remove the binding and modify the clotting blood that has formed in the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to bind with plaster below the stone, except to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the binding above it for the same reason, because when the plaster is removed near the exit of the stone, the wound closes and heals.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for this reason, when you bind the plaster above, it is necessary that you elevate the wound to the parts above, or that you return your effort, and the wound will heal as we have said. 
Capitol .lxi.	The line "Capitol .lxi." appears
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	For the given phrase:
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Stone in women is rarely produced.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	If there is a stone at any of those points, then it is difficult to cure the patient, and it is prohibited by many methods. 
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is that the woman forcefully turns her into a virgin.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that you do not find a woman well knowledgeable who would confess to the doctor when she is chaste, or is among women having husbands.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is that you do not find women very knowledgeable in this art, especially in this operation by hand.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the location of the section above the stone in women is distant from the location of the stone, for which you need a more extensive incision, and there is fear in that.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	But if necessity forces you to do this, then you must take a female doctor who is very knowledgeable, though she is rarely found.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	But if you are deprived of that, then seek someone who is very skilled and subtle, or present a female midwife well experienced in the affairs of women, or a woman who has some knowledge of this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Therefore, have that person present, and command them to do everything you instruct, starting with the examination of the hymen; this is done to check if the woman is a virgin, then they must insert their finger into her and examine the hymen.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Therefore, if that [the hymen] is found, press it with your finger, and then command them to incise it. 
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Therefore, if you find that condition, then you must gradually draw it from the opening of the bladder to those parts under the influence of its power until it reaches the root of the thigh.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then incise over that area at the midpoint of the knee, making an incision on the thigh from any side to the stop and place the stone in that part, and the patient's speech should not be hindered by the stone pressing against it.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the incision should be small at the beginning; then insert the probe into that incision, and if you feel the stone, now adjust the incision according to the amount by which you know the stone will be expelled from it.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And know that the types of stones are various: for among those, some are small and large, sharp and rough, long and round, and having ridges.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore, you should know the various types of it by what you mean regarding what you want. 
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you see a flow of blood, apply powdered vitriol to the area and leave it there for an hour until the bleeding stops, and then return to your operation once the powder has been removed.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And make sure you prepare the instruments that are used in the extraction of stones from men, so that you may be assisted by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you see a flow of blood and know that the bleeding comes from an artery that has been cut, then apply powder to the area and press it with pillows and tight bandages; do not repeat this action; leave the stone and do not extract it, for fear that the patient may die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then treat the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And when the sharpness of the blood has subsided over several days and the area has dried, then return to your operation once the powder has been removed.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter LXII.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On the incision for an incarcerated hernia.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And sometimes it is in the proper membrane which nature prepares in the part of the egg, between what is cooked and which is already another egg; and it is the chain of the genetic material between the white substance we have mentioned, and this is not anything else but yolk.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which affects the groin area, because this material is infused into those areas, and sometimes it occurs due to blows inflicted upon the groins.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this humidity has various colors, for the color of it may incline to yellow or bloody, or red, or be black and feculent, or be clear white, and this is what exists.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which it is known where this aggregation of water is, are these: for if it is in the white ciphac that we have mentioned, then the abscess is round declining a little in length like the figure of an egg, and the genus appears, for the humidity contains all around.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the humidity is in the proper fascia, then the abscess is round with parts of an egg, and for this reason, it is thought to be another egg.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the humidity is between the testicles and the scrotum, then apply the treatment there.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And when you want to know the color of the moisture, then you express the color of the moisture in the abscess using a probe whose shape is previously described; and according to what appears on the tip of the probe, judge what is inside it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	And when we come to the treatment with iron, then it is necessary to command the patient to be in a sweat-inducing state if that is possible for you, and turn the body of the patient thoroughly. 
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And then he should be laid down on his back on some sort of support slightly raised, and place the soft cloths underneath him.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then sit on the left part of him, and command the assistant to stand on his right side, who should extend his arm from one of the two sides to the region of the genitals and to the area below the belly button.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a wide spatula and split the region of the genitals from the middle along the length towards the perineum.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And the incision should be made exactly equally distant from the line where you will cut the skin of the genitals, until it reaches the white membrane comprehending.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And pull on that area, observe carefully, and be cautious not to penetrate it; and when you pull, make sure it hangs loosely, and examine it subtlety with your pulling according to what is possible for you.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then puncture the full water-filled membrane with a wide incision, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate the two lips of the incision with forceps, and extend the bladder upwards; and do not touch the cord that contains the vas deferens, and incise the bladder in such a way as is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And incise it entirely or in pieces, especially its thin side, for if you do not examine the incision meticulously, there is no guarantee that the water will not return. 
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	If you proceed to operate on him from the outside of his scrotum during the time of your operation, then once you have completed the section of the penis, return it inside, and then suture the two lips of the scrotal sac together, and then treat that wound as you would other wounds until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the man's testicle corrupted by another disease, then you must tie off the vessels that are in the spermatic cord, and remove the testicle, and then treat it as we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	But if the water is divided into two parts equally, then you know that there are two hernias; therefore, incise that part in the same way as you did for the other one; and if it appears to you that it should be operated on, then do so.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	Then you should clean the blood and insert wool soaked in oil or oiled wool into the incisions; place another piece of wool that has been soaked in wine and oil over the two testicles and the entrance to the abdomen; and put cloths folded and pillows on top, and bind them with a bandage according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And then two cloths should be taken and filled with carded wool according to this pattern; and the ends with which pressure is applied with cotton or wet wool should be made, and they should be attached with ties in the waistband of the pants, and one of the ends should go from the buttocks into the two, and the second should go at the junction of the undergarment, and two ends over each thigh and two other ends on each knee, and all ties should be fastened in the waistband of the pants.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with a cautery instead of a surgical section with iron; and you should take a finely cut knife-like cautery and incise the chain of the inguinal region, and ignite it as we have recommended between the time when the white scalp containing the fluid is exposed, and then take a cautery in this form:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	And it resembles the Greek letter.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	Then pierce with that cautery, and ignite it until all the moisture is expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then extend the cautery with hooks, and squeeze with hooks, and cauterize with a finely ignited cautery; and incise it as much as you can until you completely remove it; and be careful of the area so that the fire does not touch it.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And you should know that this operation is safer and involves less blood flow, and is better than an operation with incision.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	And if an abscess causes you trouble during the time of incision or cautery, or if there is blood flow, then you must treat whatever trouble it causes you with a cure that suits him according to what is said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the patient is weak and does not hope for a second operation due to its horror, then administer perforation as I recommend here; this is when you are certain, based on what we have said about the signs, that the hernia is aqueous.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then you must have the patient sit on some raised chair, then puncture the abscess at its lowest part with a blunt spatula, and maintain the puncture according to the length of time needed.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And make the incision wide enough for all the water to drain out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Then place something over the punctured area and bind it there, so that the remaining water can drain out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then treat that inside so that the plague may be healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	And if there is an obstruction to the discharge of water at that time, you pierce it: this is only done when the white membrane in the opening of the wound causes an obstacle and prevents the outflow of water, then you must introduce a probe or instrument into the wound with which the water from dropsy is extracted, the form of which has been described previously; or apply a small device to the compression of the wound.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And know that the water returns and accumulates again after about six months or so; and when it accumulates again, then pierce it according to the same method, so that the patient may thus spend their days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter LXIII.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	On the incision of a flesh hernia and its treatment.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in the incision of this flesh hernia, there is great risk of fatal danger in major procedures; therefore, in my opinion, it is better to opt for its reduction and saving it by those means.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I am recalling the operation in that case and the specifics of the abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Thus, I say that abscesses arise in the bodies where the veins are composed and this happens for various reasons: either due to an excess of sharp bitterness which is poured into the veins, or by percussion.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and it is not accompanied by pain, and it is a severe abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And the abscess that has become hardened is called lapificated, of which the color is dark, and there is no sensation in it.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes it is caused by the narrowing of the arteries and by the inflammation of those, as is already perceived in the recollection of it, or by the inflammation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	But that which is caused by the inflammation of arteries is known by the dispersion of the abscess when you press it with your fingers; and it should not be touched.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	But the one that is caused by the inflammation of veins does not disperse at all when pressed with the fingers.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that on this kind of condition a section may be made and on other flesh; and so you incise the chain of the testicles, then stretch the scrotum upwards to its parts, extract what is inside the white sack, release the suspensorium of the vessels, tie them up, and then cut the suspensorium after you have released it from all parts of the scrotum.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	And so, if the scrotum is already consolidated with those fleshy parts, then you must extract the scrotum and incise it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adhesion due to any cause within the sack, or between the vessels, then you must release all of that adhesion and incise it with a circular incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	But if there is a growth of flesh in the area of the adhesion that is behind, then you must incise all of that which belongs to it and extract the scrotum as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And so when your operation is complete, then fill the wound with wool infused in oiled and fermented wine; then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	Capitol .lxiv.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	Here is the translation of the provided line:
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	Vit is an abscess enveloped by some sort of membrane resembling a blister with softening of the testicles, and it makes difficult any physical exercise or walking for the patient. 
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this disease, it is out of fear due to which there is a recollection or memory that precedes it.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, we must speak of the operation that they perform first.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And it says that the patient must be seated on an elevated chair; and then pull up the supporter of the testicles to their places; and then tie the cord of the genitals with your fingers using probes that are proven effective for this purpose; and let those other assistants who are with you, extend them forcefully.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then cut with a sharp spatula through a transverse section in the right place where the vessels are exposed.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then squeeze from all sides as we have said in the extraction of artery worms that are on the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then insert an needle with double-thread into those [points], and tie it at the first of the places where you make incisions, and tie it again at the last of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then incise in the middle of the area with a straight cut according to the length of the body, and extract what has been added by the foul and corrupted humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then treat the wound with a method used for other wounds where you want pus to be generated so that veins are opened through which one of two blood types might flow out, as this is not harmful.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	But if you accidentally cut all the veins, then it is necessary to either remove the testicles or let the testicles be closed off with the veins, so that they are deprived of all nourishment due to the cutting of the veins, and they should be destroyed, or closed off so that they do not function properly anymore.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter 65.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	On the treatment of intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is due to a tear that extends from the spine over the abdomen towards the inguinal region of the belly, causing intestines to protrude through that rupture into one of the inguinal canals.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the spleen or due to exertion by him, and these two types occur for various reasons: from impact, from jumping, from shouting, from lifting something heavy, or from similar causes.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of this condition, when it is due to an extension of gout, is that it occurs gradually over a long period, and does not happen suddenly; it is an abscess similar within where the wind enters so that the gout compresses the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of it is when it comes from the cutting of the spleen, for at the beginning, it causes a sudden and intense pain; and there is an abscess that appears different from the usual appearance of the swelling, and this is due to the protrusion of the intestine, and its body extends beyond the area of the spleen.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And sometimes the intestine pushes through the tissue, and this kind of intestinal hernia is called zirbal.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And sometimes it is caused by gas, and sometimes the intestine splits open, and here it gets trapped, causing great suffering to the patient, and sometimes it leads to severe and intensified pain, especially when pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of this kind of illness with iron, there is fear, so it must be avoided in that case.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the method of the operation for this is that you command the patient to push the intestine back into its cavity with their hand; if it obeys and returns, then have them lie down on their back between your hands, and lift their chest.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then place the chain, which you tie above the chain of the testicles, and cut through the chain of the testicles entirely along its length; then insert forceps into the two lips of the incision according to what is needed to open the incision with those.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the section is according to the quantity that you are able to remove from it so that the pus may be drained out.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then push out that sac which holds the cord of the testicles, until the white hard part of each side is uncovered.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	And when you insert your finger into the area where the testicle is, between the white part, which is below the spermatic cord, and the second layer, separate it from the adhesion that is in the area behind the scrotum.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	Then use your hand to pull the spermatic cord outward, and with this action extend the white layer upward with your left hand, and lift the scrotum along with the layer to the area of the incision; and command the assistant to stretch the scrotum upward while you separate the adhesion behind it completely.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And use your fingers to ensure that there is no cause for the intestine being wrapped in the hard white layer.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	But if you find any cause for it, then you push that part into the abdomen below.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then you take a needle on which is threaded a thick cord made of seven threads, and insert it through the rear end of the white layer, which is below the spermatic cord, where the incision is; then cut the extremities that protrude from the thread until they are four threads, and then arrange some of them in a figure resembling a cross; and tie with this the white layer, which we have said is beneath the spermatic cord, with a strong suture on both sides.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then wrap the extremities of the veins and bind them tightly with a strong ligature so that none of the vessels that nourish those areas can transmit any cause, so that an abscess does not occur here.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And place another ligature according to the first ligature, about three fingers away from it; then between these two ligatures leave the part that is below the cord of the testicles the size of a finger, and incise all the remaining part following its round shape, and remove the egg.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then cut into the part of the scrotum where the testicles are located, in such a way that blood and pus flow out, just as we have described in what we have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then apply wool soaked in oil and place it on the wound; apply the dressing we have described (and sometimes the white cypress is cauterized, as we mentioned at the beginning of the section on blood flow, because this often happens), and leave the dressing until it falls off by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	But if the binding of it is delayed, then bathe it with warm water and apply it as described until it falls off.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the wound with the other methods for treating wounds until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter LXVI.
De hernia ventosa.	On Windy Hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this windy hernia, no one has been bold enough to attempt its cure with iron (surgery).
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first ones said that it is done as we have recounted in the hernia which is with fire; which is that you tie the vessels near the section where it is convenient for him; and then dry in the middle place around the abscess with that which opens that, so that the vessels fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And treat the plague according to what we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter LXVII.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Of the disruption that is made in the ankles. 
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	And sometimes a rupture occurs in the knees as we have said, and you expose the area.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And do not tell the parents any cause of the hernias to the child; and if you do tell them, it is little; and return in at all times.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	And if this condition persists for a long time, a precise incision is made in the groin through which the intestine descends into the groin; and this happens due to the stretching of the groin, as we have said, which causes the groin to stretch, and then it becomes softened, and the area becomes inflamed and protrudes.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the treatment of it is with cautery, as was mentioned earlier in the description of it.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And sometimes it is treated with iron in the following manner: the patient lies on their back between the operator's hands, and then the area of the rupture that has become inflamed and protrudes is dried by a lateral section according to the quantity of three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then strengthen the white groin that is below the navel until it is uncovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the probe and place it over the protruding area of the groin, and press it against the front of the abdomen.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then sew the two protruding areas at the end of the groin with a suture, joining one to the other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then extract the extremity of the wound, and do not incise the entire circumference, nor extend the hole, nor cause any other issue as I will teach you in the treatment of intestinal hernias.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then treat that with the treatment of wounds, and when you cut the abscesses, clean that area and restore the wound before it solidifies; for the cicatrix is contracted and does not adjust to the prominence of the rupture.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cautery is better in this location, because it is closer to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Capitol .lxviii.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	Of the softening of the cord of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Sometimes the cord of the testicles is softened in some men because the flesh around it is softened, and this is noted in observation.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Then it is necessary for the one who is engaged in the treatment to make the patient lie according to their back, and to lift up all the cord that is softened over the natural cord; and then to sew together both sides with a suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you want, at the beginning, remove the excess of the softened cord with three or four stitches and with a strong suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	Then cut between the sutures; then heal by curing the other wounds until it is healed and the pus has drained.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter LXIX.
De castracio.	On castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that castration is excommunicated in our law, but for certain reasons it is合法的记述在我这部著作中；记住它的必要性只有两种方式，其中一种是让医生在被询问时知道如何治疗发生这种情况的人；另一种方式是我们有时需要为其他动物做阉割手术以供我们的使用，比如马、公牛和猪等类似动物。 
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And thus it is said that castration is performed in two ways: either by atrophy or by cutting and tearing. 
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	And in the case where it is caused by atrophy, the method of treatment is that we should boil the animal in hot water until the sinews of it are softened and become loose and hang.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then take those with your hand inside so that they remain resolved and do not appear under the touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	But in a castration performed by incision and severing, it is necessary that you hold the animal and press the cord of the testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And then apply the suspension device, and incise on each bone with a cut between two joints.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then incise that pus which you have squeezed out.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not leave any cause on those with gout except the subtle gout which is on the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of castration is better, which is done by atrophy, because atrophy leaves no cause from the testicles for the animal to desire mating.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And then treat the plague until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter LXX.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in men occurs in two ways: one is when it appears in the space where the scrotum of the testicles is, between the two testicles, taking on the form of a female genitalia with hair.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And sometimes urine flows from that area in the scrotum where the testicles are.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In women, it is of one kind: the female genitalia above the vagina appears as two male testicles slightly to the right side, like the foreskin and two testicles of a man.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the cure is of three types: two for men and one type for women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is necessary that you incise those tight muscles before the swelling escapes from there, and then treat them with the cure for other ailments.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second type for men, where you draw urine from the area near the testicles, there is neither cure nor operation for it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	On swelling and protruding flesh caused by conditions in women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Severe swelling appears tightly due to natural causes before it is pressed and the observation is made; and sometimes it increases in some women to such an extent that it spreads similarly as in men and even extends to intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Then it is necessary that you remove the excess swelling with your hand or with a tool and incise it.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not hesitate to make the incision, especially near the vaginal area, so that it does not cause a flow of blood.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And then treat that with the healing of the wounds until it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	Newly born flesh is the flesh that grows in the wounds of the mother until it fills them, and forcefully comes out at the outer parts resembling a tail (and for this reason some early doctors called it “tailed disease”); therefore, we must incise it as we would slowly cut into something, and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter LXXII. 
De curacio de alratica.	Here is the translation of the provided line:
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	And accidental is due to illness that has preceded it, and that which is caused either by improperly adjusted flesh or by a subtle or thick foreign body.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it is done either in the womb of the mother, or on its sides, or on its upper pus, or on its lower pus, and you prohibit coitus, pregnancy, and childbirth, and you strongly prohibit menstruation. 
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the knowledge of that is gained by observing the midwife, if the obstruction is visible, it is clear; but if it is not visible, then you seek it with your fingers or with a probe.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	If obstruction is due to a subtle substance stuck between the two lips, then you should cut and disrupt that area.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And you place cushions on both labia, and then place your index fingers of both hands inside.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman is on her back, her thighs spread apart, and then spread the two lips forcefully so that that subtle barrier is broken and the obstruction is opened.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take wool and soak it in oil and place that over the area, and cover with something during the day so that the incised area does not become hardened.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	And if the abscess is large and thick, then you must incise it with a broad spatula or with a myrtle leaf.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	But if the obstruction is due to flesh, then suspend it with a hook, and incise it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And use the medicines that stop blood flow from bites, such as hellebore, dragon's blood, and enses, mixed with egg white.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a wide lead cannula so that the wound does not close lightly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And keep it for several days and administer a dry cataplasm.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And then it should be treated with the other method of consolidation until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes it happens in the natural formation of other flesh, and then you must incise it according to this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	If this is for a chronic abscess, in the case of a chronic abscess that is on the breast, do not perform any procedure with iron in any way.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter LXXIII.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	For the given text:
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already said in the division the types of those and the signs of those, and to say thus those that receive cure and those that do not receive cure.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore, I say that hemorrhoids and tumors when they are in the region of the large intestine and do not appear to the senses, then surgery should not be performed on those.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	And those which are in the openings of the womb through which one feels pain, are those that are treated.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And it is necessary that you place the woman in warm water and then extend the thighs with scissors or with rough cloth, and incise them with knives.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then sprinkle over those wounds the flow of blood with one of the non-adhesive powders such as mastic and similar to those.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then foment his feet for an hour, and then place them in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the flow of blood persists, then soak her in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate peels and walnuts and similar items.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And then take flour of oats and mix it with honey and sweet wine and make a plaster with this mixture on his back.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the blood is congealed, that is good; and if not, make it adhere with two cupping vessels, and perform scarification on the nipples.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take wool and soak it in the juice of coriander or in the juice of arnica or in the juice of plantain mixed with fermented wine and apply it to the area; and then treat the area with ointments until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	If you come across something that has a harsh appearance, make sure that you inscribe what appears to you from it as I have said in the text similarly. 
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And care for that which is inside so it may be healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter LXXIV.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	Of perforation of an abscess accidentally in the belly.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Motaz specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already spoken of these diseases and their types and their signs, and their treatments in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And it must be said in this treatise about an abscess that appears on the thigh when it is one of those abscesses that collect pus, and if you want to know how the operation with iron is performed.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Then you must consider if the pain of the abscess at its beginning is acute with percussion and phlegm and fever, and sometimes it reddens, and if you press on it, then do not treat it with puncture, and cure it with that which aids in maturation until the acuteness of the symptoms ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And now you must have the woman sit on a stool that has two steps; and lean her back against it, adjust her feet to the lower part of the stomach, and spread her thighs apart, and place her arms below her knees, and tie them with a suitable binding.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	Then the midwife should follow the right path and administer the instrument with which the opening of the mother is cut, the form of which will be detailed in the following sections. 
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And when you wish to administer this instrument, you should place it with care at the entrance of the woman's womb, and that part of the instrument which enters into the womb should not be more than the entrance of the womb itself, easing the patient.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	And if the instrument is larger than the opening of the womb, then you must place pillows on the tissue of the womb's opening so that it prevents any instrument from entering the womb's opening.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And you must place the thread that runs through the instrument on top and have the assistant hold the instrument and rotate the thread until the opening of the womb is dilated.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the swelling appears and is touched with the hand, and it feels warm and moist, then you must dry that area by applying a spatula to the head of it.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the pus is drained, then you must apply to the wound a cloth soaked in rose oil or anointed oil that has some astringency; and place a poultice on the incision at the opening of the womb.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And place outside the womb and on the perineum clean wool soaked in water in which mallows have been boiled.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then it should be treated for about two days with ointment which you should apply until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And at times the wound and the affected area are washed with a mixture of water and honey, then with water in which there has been boiled the root of iris or longwort, and then return to the ointment.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the plague is inside the main wound, then you must abstain from treating it with iron, using instead the methods we have described in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Capitol .lxxv.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach the midwives in what manner the unhealthy embryos are treated when they follow a non-natural figure.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu,
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore, when you see those signs, then it is necessary that the patient's belly be compressed so that the embryo descends easily because when they sit on their head, say to them the second one, and clean it of those excesses with a good cleansing. 
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	And the part that differs from this is not natural and not praiseworthy, for when the embryo is placed on its feet and its body is put in front of its head and its feet, or one hand is at its side or foot, or its head and one hand are turned, or to its belly, and it quickly turns around its neck, resembling unpraiseworthy figures.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	When there is necessary cause for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all those matters, and that she guard against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And I am showing all the figures of those [conditions], and what mechanism is in them so that it may be understood by this and stand true upon this.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the fetus lies on its head due to natural movement, and if it is strongly positioned in a difficult place for the woman, and sometimes the strength of the uterus is already weakened, then perform that procedure, or let women have it, and evaporate its seed with fenugreek juice and humid oils.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then insert the midwife between the small of their back and split it with that second tool, or scrape that area with her fingernail until you remove what is inside from moisture.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the woman’s abdomen until the fetus descends.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	And if it does not descend, then the woman must be treated with a poultice of flaxseed and a poultice of fenugreek with massage.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	Then command the one in charge of the treatment to compress [the area] and make her sneeze with spices; hold her mouth and nose for about an hour, during which the fetus will be expelled soon.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if the two arms of the fetus are expelled first at the beginning, then you must gradually and gently reduce them back.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	But if it does not obey the treatment, then place the woman on a stool and lift her feet up, and then drop the stool onto the ground; the woman should be held so she does not fall due to the concussion.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the arms are not returned inside and the fetus dies, then incise those areas and extract the remains of the fetus or tie the body of the fetus to your hand with cloth and pull it out evenly, as it will be expelled soon.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	Of the embryonic discharge upon its feet. 
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When you are on top of the patient's legs, then you must push them down, and then turn the sheet slightly, and then smooth it out, and then take one leg and stretch it little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	When you have entered between the thighs, then you command them to strain, and cause that they sneeze with effort, for it will be dislodged if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not dislodged by what we have recommended, then you gradually return the sheet until you position it in its natural form again, because it will be dislodged with a gentle insertion at that point. 
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if all that we have recommended is prohibited, then take some moss of althea and dissolved gum, and pound it well in the mortar, and then apply this mixture to the woman's womb, at the lowest part of her abdomen.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And then make that cauterization with tepid water, until it reaches the hypochondriac regions. 
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when you see that the parts of him have become inflamed, then perform the fumigation with myrtle and apply that to him.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when you have the sub-fumigation for an hour, then make her sit on a stool, and then make that person sneeze and open their mouth wide, and lift from there, and press the lower part of their abdomen with slight compression, because the substance will be expelled quickly.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the patient is released in this manner, then you gently insert their limbs little by little; and then the woman should be placed on her side, with her feet hanging down, and those should be lying on the ground, and complete their limbs.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And then press on the stomach of the patient little by little, and then extract what is beneath their feet from between the ears where it has been prepared in the part below. 
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the wind does not come out easily, then take their feet and move them with forceful motion, and then gradually press on what is above the hypochondriac regions until the wind rises to the upper parts.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And then insert your fingers and gently spread the wound little by little, and command the woman to bear down as the wound is being sutured.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Suture the wound longitudinally while holding one of your fingers alongside it.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Attempt to reduce the dislocation of his hand, but if you cannot do that, then lift the woman and let her go. 
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if the person cannot walk, then lay them on the ground, and vigorously shake their thighs with a strong shaking motion, and then administer ointments which you have prepared from mucilages.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if childbirth has occurred, then have the woman sit on a chair, and immediately focus on the reduction of swelling, aligning the limb according to its natural form, and make the woman sneeze and command her to compress herself internally until it is properly set in place. 
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Exuding from the neck over the head spread out his arms and the surface of his is on the side of his mother.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	It is necessary that the midwife hold the hand of the child and then turn it little by little, so that this can be done easily. 
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is and how much it is warmed, then apply over his anus what we have recommended of oil and ointments.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And then command him to moan little by little, and when you have done that, then lay him on a chair and order him to incline towards the right side, and then command him to be compressed; and make him sneeze with caution.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When they say to treat the worst of these conditions according to this method, consider it, and now you cut into the second area with your nail until the moisture is drained out.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the swelling is hanging over his face and neck, then you should incise that of the windpipe, so that it is not obstructed and he does not die.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	Then push the swelling into the areas inside where you need to place it, and instruct the woman to compress herself several times, and it will be expelled with a light discharge, if God so wills.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The outcome of twin births or multiple fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that twins are often born, and sometimes three or four are born, though this is rare and seldom happens; however, their causes are due to nature, not life. 
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And among those, even if they are multiplied, a second one, and they are separated by a ciphac, distinguish them within the ligament in the navel of each of these. And sometimes they are expelled as if it were done by a light natural excretion, and sometimes they exit due to an unpraiseworthy excretion as we have recounted.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if there are difficulties in childbirth and you arrive at what we have said about unnatural presentations, then you treat those cases as we have recounted.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is skillful and does this with ease and subtlety, and with care, and is inventive according to every shape according to how it is prepared by the ingenuity leading to health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remembrance of that which is formed in the womb from embryos and aborts.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Here is the translation line by line:
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all of this must be known by the midwife who strongly resembles this condition, and thus applies herself to it with what is necessary.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Capitol .lxxvi.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	From the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you treat a dead fetus as we have described in the section on medication and it has not been expelled, and you must use manual operation, then you should consider whether the woman is of sound health and not suffering from any conditions that could endanger her.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then the woman should be placed face down on the bed on her stomach, with her head inclined to one side and her thighs raised.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the minister should hold her on both sides or have her tied to the bed so that her body does not move during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	Then you should moisten the birth canal of the mother with humid oils and with a poultice of fennel, fenugreek, and its seeds.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	Then anoint the practitioner's hand with those oils and poultices, and then gently insert the hand into the mother, and then search with the hand for the place where the fingers can grasp the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And the following is convenient in this case: then you consider if the device is prepared that you will descend upon his head, and then you place the hooks in his eyes, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or under the beard, or in the shoulder blade, or in the areas near the ribs, or under the hypochondriac regions.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	And if the discomfort is in the patient's feet, then it is in the shin area, or in the middle of the back.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And it is necessary that the probe be held with the right hand, and place its curvature in the area between the fingers of the left hand, and insert the hand easily so that the probe reaches one of those areas we have mentioned, until it reaches the swollen cause.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then place and keep another person in the appropriate position next to him, or a third if necessary, so that the traction is equal, and not an extension according to its straightness alone.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And let it be massaged all over, so that the pain of him is alleviated as is done in dental procedures for the extraction of it.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And one must apply to him what is between them so that the extension is softened; and if any part of it is retained, then the midwife must anoint some of her fingers with oil and skillfully insert those and turn with them what is retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore, if a part of the fetus is stuck, then the traction should be changed to the one that is more effective; and do this until the entire fetus is delivered.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if one hand is extended before the other and it is not possible to reduce it due to its contraction, then a cloth should be wrapped around that hand; then extract it until all of it is delivered, and incise it either at the joint of the hand or in the wrist.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And thus you must do the same on the other hand and on both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	And if the head of the abscess is large, or you encounter constriction during puncturing, or if there is water tightly packed at the top, then you must insert between the fingers a pointed instrument and split the head to drain the water, or use an instrument called “alundat” for this purpose, the form of which will be described along with other instruments in the chapter that follows this one.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And similarly, if the abscess has a large head by nature, then you must incise it with a scalpel, or take hold of it with an alundat as we have said; and then extract the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head has been punctured but is constricted, you should split it open so that the moisture within the feet can be drained out.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	But if it is not complicated and does not require puncturing, then you should incise the head as soon as it is possible for you to do so.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the lower part of the abdomen is swollen with an abscess or is in a state of dropsy, then you must perforate that area to drain the fluid present there.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	And if the flux is toward the lower legs, then its attraction is slight and the direction of its flow to the mouth of the vein is gentle. 
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	And if the abdomen and the feet are constricted, then you must extract that with a cloth which you have wrapped around your hand, and you should cut open the abdomen and the feet so that what is inside may flow out. 
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	Here is the translation line by line:
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the wound is constricted by an abscess which has occurred at the eye, then it should not be rubbed over it; first, you must administer an effusion of moist and fatty causes.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And administer plasters; and continue to bathe the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the wound is on their side, then if possible, it should be stitched; and what we have said should be administered to the fresh wound.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if this is not possible, then it should be cut into pieces and extracted.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And it is necessary that you do not leave any cause within the second layer.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all of your procedure, then administer what we have said about the treatment to the swellings that result from the incision.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if bleeding occurs, then bathe in styptic waters and administer the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have seen a woman whose fetus in the womb was dead, and then she became pregnant again, and afterward, another fetus died.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happened to him that after a long time, a swelling occurred in his abdomen; and it swelled inside, and he began to emit pus.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called to his care, and treated him for a long time, but the plague did not heal.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I placed on him several plaisters of strong attraction, and drew out a bone from him, and after passing some days, I drew out another bone; and I was very amazed, for there should not be any bones in the belly.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	Then I thought that they were the bones of a dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then I treated the plague, and extracted many bones from him, the woman existing in her own multiple dispositions, and she lived in this manner for a long time, removing a little of the arm from him. 
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I do not mean to be strange, but rather because in this lies knowledge and assistance for what the doctor skillfully administers with their hand for treatment.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of an instrument with which the womb is opened:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of a stretcher on which the ribs are joined, with two hooks at the two ends of two handles.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	However, this hook must be finer than the stretcher and should be made of iron or wood.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the width of each handle should be two fingers, and the margin of each should be one finger on both sides. The length of each is one and a half palms; in the middle of the two handles, there are two joints made from the same wood which are already fixed, the length of which is half a palm plus a little more, and the width of each is two fingers or a little more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additions are inserted into the mouth of the mother so that it is opened with those when you turn the two prescribed instruments.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	But however at the end of his two additions thus as sometimes, and the length of those additions is each one palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to deliver the baby, then place the woman on her back with her feet hanging down, and open up what is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then open your hand with the instrument just as you would with scissors, cutting according to the amount you want of the measurement of the mouth of the wound before the midwife does what she wants. 
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of dizziness which the ancients said:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is similar to forceps which have teeth at the end, just like tweezers, and sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, just like tweezers, which have teeth like saw teeth with which it is incised and contorted.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Forma de amesidat pauc:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of an inch having a spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Forma de unci havent doas spinas:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of forceps with teeth that grip with which the head of the fetus is grasped:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Forma de dos espatums latz:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All those instruments are exercised, and when the varieties of these are multiplied and prepared by the artisans, it becomes lighter for their operation and more suitable for people due to its quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not use those instruments at all; you should prepare yourself, for the necessity of them is not excusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	From the extraction of the stone (or more specifically, "second stone," which could refer to a
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second stage of labor is delayed, you should command the patient to hold her breath, then make her sneeze with some刺激（如辣椒粉），并将你的手放在她的嘴和鼻子上，如果通过这种方式能将其排出，那就很好了。
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then you take a bowl and pierce the lid with a hole and place therein herbs to burn at the mouth of the mother, such as calamus, rue, anise, chamomile, arabian saffron, and cassia lignea.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water in a pot, and place that over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then place a reed tube in the mouth of the mare, and keep it there until the vapor reaches the cavity of the mare.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then make that person sneeze as we have said, and the second one will be expelled quickly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	Here is the translation of the given text line by line:
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Before it is necessary that the sides right and left be changed with ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And then adjust the amount of traction, for it will obey and yield from adherence.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the opening of the womb is narrowed, we have already recommended treatment with sneezing and with medication using herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	However, if it is not expelled by all the causes which we have recommended, then be careful not to strain too much in repeating the process of abstraction. Instead, whatever has been expelled from him into the opening of the womb should be brought to the thigh of the woman, and then anoint her with unguents and a four-part medicine; for this will cause her to expel it over several days and dissolve it so that it is finally expelled.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	However, when it rises, the bad humor ascends to the head and to the stomach, which harms the patient. Therefore, it is necessary to administer fumigations and appropriate treatments for this condition.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	However, some of the Ancients have prescribed fumigation with mustard and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Method of using an instrument to fumigate a woman suffering from retained menses and the second illness:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It seems like the text is in an archaic or constructed language that draws elements from Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Let's
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And place the narrower end on the cone and the wider end over the fire, and let the fumigation be placed over the embers of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And keep it there until that fumigation is consumed and repeat with another one.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	On the treatment of an unperforated infant's anus.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Some children are born with their anus unperforated, which is a fine and obstructed channel.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then it is necessary for the midwife to pierce that channel with her finger; and if not, pierce it with a sharp spatula, being careful not to touch the bladder.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	Then place wool soaked in wine and oil over that area; then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	But if you fear that it is obstructed, then insert a catheter into the channel for several days, and remove it when the child needs to defecate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And already an obstruction of the anus occurs due to the consolidation of a boil or abscess; then it is necessary that this consolidation be incised, and then it should be treated with what we have said about treatment and lead.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	For the treatment of fistulas that appear below:
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that appear in the lower part of the area where pus is produced are large and thick, those which appear close to the anus externally or in the space of that area.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is a fistula or abscess.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that swelling is old and comes from moist white phlegm or subtle putrefaction, and sometimes these fistulas can be penetrating.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those that penetrate are known by what is discharged from them through secretion and flatulence; and sometimes the patient suffers from discharge, which is often expelled as worms.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And sometimes these fistulas penetrate into the space between the bladder and the urethra; and they can also penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the bone of the hip.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And the way to distinguish a penetrating fistula from a non-penetrating one is by inserting your index finger into the anus and carefully introducing a thread of wool or metal into the fistula when there is no tortuosity.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if there is tortuosity in that fistula, then insert a fine thread of lead or horsehair into it until you feel the thread or hair with your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel any of these signs and do not observe any cause for the illness such as indigestion, worms, or flatulence, as we have said, then know that it is non-penetrating, and now attend to the treatment.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the urethra of the penis, then its significance is that urine leaks from it and prevents the area from being consolidated with medicine.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	But if it penetrates into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the area, then the sign is that it extends deeply within without any curvature in the bone, and there is pain in the circuit of the affected part; and that from it comes continuous pus; and that it does not respond to medication, nor can it be consolidated with ointment.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those penetrating fistulas, a complete cure is not possible, and the treatment for these involves the skill and ingenuity of the surgeons on whom they depend.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	But in those that are not penetrating and are not old, healing with iron is hoped for, as I will now recommend to you, which I have already mentioned.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the patient lies between your hands on their back and raises their legs upwards, with their thighs inclined towards their abdomen, and then insert a lead probe, or a reed if it is in the twisted fistula, until you feel where the probe reaches.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if the patient feels pain around the neck, then you must insert your index finger into the neck.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel in your finger the attempt already by itself to penetrate uncoveredly, or that which you feel between your finger and that siphac or flesh, then you know certainly that it is penetrating; and then do not work on that, for there is no healing there, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But however some say it is healthy in some men later.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And for the treatment in which improvement is hoped for, you shall make a fine cautery according to the width of the fistula, as previously mentioned, and introduce that heated cautery into the fistula until it reaches around the core; then repeat this two or three times until you know that all those fistular tissues resembling bird feather shafts are properly adhered together.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	Then treat it with dressings wrapped in bandages until all the adhered tissues come out, and then treat it with medicines that generate and consolidate the flesh. If it is healed, that is good; if not, it will never be cured by any other treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if you insert a probe inside, and it does not penetrate your finger which is in the anus, and between that finger and the probe there is a thin layer of flesh or membrane, and twist the fistula so that it lies flat on the surface of the cord, then dry the cord from the beginning of the fistula. You will see it drying with the probe, and place it inside the fistula until the drying reaches the point where the tip of the probe ends, and through the probe, it is released and cut.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then clean those fistulated flesh which resembles pen feathers and do not break any of them for any reason.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if a flow of blood happens to come between you and your operation when you are dissecting those tissues, then the best thing to do and the lightest instrument is to cauterize with fire or with sharp medicine, for cautery with fire has two good habits: it is an adjustment of those tissues being brought together, and an abscission, a drying up of the blood and humidities.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	Then treat that area with cloths wrapped in butter or finely ground meal until the place stops bleeding, and then treat the wound with ointments that generate and consolidate firm flesh.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And thus medicines in which there is astringency and drying; when it is restored, it is healed and you do not fear recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	But if the fistula has already penetrated into the rectum and extends from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the rectum and examine it with that.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And thus if you feel resistance and between you and it there is merely a veil of skin or flesh, and penetration is hindered, then it is not an operation on it except as a way of trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	Here is the translation line by line:
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the fistula is treated in this manner: it is when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it goes through the side of the buttock around the surface of the body with the chain and at the margin of the buttocks, then take a perforated extremity probe, which is like a needle used for preparing the hearts in this way:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	And introduce into that wound a cloth wrapped with five cloths or around it; then, introduce and try with a cloth in the fistula until you reach its cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	More if you penetrate the margin of the anus from inside, then you extract the thread from that wound just as you insert your finger into the anus; and you pull out the end of the thread and tie both ends together tightly, and leave it for one or two days, and when more cut the thread in the flesh, tighten well that which is between so that those parts of flesh are cut off which are between the two ends of the thread and fall away. 
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then treat the wound while it is still consolidating and healing.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the openings of the fistula are not penetrating, then make them penetrate in whatever way you prepare, but ensure that there is movement within, for it is not up to you to cause an incision that would harm the tissue; and then treat it until it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The method of using a spiked spatula with which the fistula is split: the curvature of which is sharply pointed and the other part is not sharp, so as not to incise what is not necessary, just as is sometimes done.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	On suturing hemorrhoids in which blood flows during the incision of them.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids exist in two ways, for they either appear near the anus resembling carbonized matter, or they may look like pieces of grease.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And of them, some are small and others are large, and blood flows continuously from them; they are numerous, and they are outside the anus, and at its extremities.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	And yet those which are around the anus follow months of low humidity, during which yellow water or a little blood flows continuously, and according to the color of the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the treatment for that which is inside the anus is that you command the patient to sit and strain themselves such that the anus opens and the hemorrhoids appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you take care and suspend them with hooks or hold them with your fingernail, and then cut those veins at their roots.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	If the nails are not held in place due to moisture and softening of them, then take those with coarse cloth or with leather or with a beating of wool, and extract them with your fingers, and then incise them and sprinkle over them certain powders suitable near the incision so that they serve as cautery; or cauterize them according to what is described in the chapter on cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	Then treat them with other treatments until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the stool does not come out easily, then use a clyster on the patient with a small opening, and wash it with the water that is in the colon, so that it facilitates mild evacuation when the patient squeezes. 
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	If the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then their cause is light, and you should take them with your fingernail, or use tweezers to grasp them, cut them, and then treat them as we have said until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And for the incision that you will make, you must administer sutures in this manner: take wrapped thread and insert it into a needle, then pull the hemorrhoids to the upper parts, and have the needle penetrate through to the other side at the root; wrap both ends of the thread around the part furthest from the needle and do so transversely; tighten the hemorrhoid firmly with a strong grip, and then tie the thread and remove the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this to all of them, but leave one without stitching, so that the excess blood can flow out from it.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	Then place over the anus a cloth infused with anointed oil or ointment; put that over it and instruct the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then leave it in place until it dries; and when it is dry, treat them with ointments or other treatments until they are healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	Of the treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	White spots appear due to drying of the wound or natural constriction.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And when they are old and no longer useful in that medicine, then you must scrape those areas with the tip of a spatula or with your nail until they become moist and remove the scabbed pus on top, which prevents them from healing; then treat those areas until they consolidate.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then you remove those areas with vigorous scraping until blood comes out and they are raw; then treat those areas until they heal.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	The treatment of hemorrhoids is as follows.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that alamermar, which is crucial, appears as round spots according to the color of the skin similar to the head of a nail, and it occurs all over the body but mostly on the lower parts like the feet and toes, and sometimes because of these pains, they name it thus.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	Then it is necessary to incise what is around the nail, hold it with forceps or tweezers, and remove it from its root; then treat that area.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you want, cauterize the wound that is mentioned at the beginning of the chapter. 
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	And here is the translation line by line based on your example:
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And the treatment of it is that you stretch and incise that area, or that you tighten that with a thread or with bandages inside which bind.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize it as we have said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And already the reversed and non-reversed ones have been removed with the instrument that I describe.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	And the formica is a small furry or large fistula-like prominence on the surface of the body moving in the urine, and when the cold encounters it, it causes pain resembling an ant bite, and it forms around the body. 
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And the cure for it is that you take a tube made of goose bone or vulture bone, and let it be strong, and place that over the boil so that the circle of the tube contains the parts of it; then rotate your hand with the tube until you incise what is in the circuit of the boil, and place that in the flesh's pus, and eradicate the boil from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, do this with a tube made of reed or iron according to this method:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Let the part above the tube be tapered, closed (that is, unperforated), and wrapped so that when you place it on your finger, the rotation of that is facilitated.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you wish to cauterize the boil, do so according to what is mentioned in the cautery of a tumor in the chapter on cauterization.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	On the shape of the instruments that are used to give chrism.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Sometimes chrism is made of silver or lead or molded or hammered reed; and at other times it is made in small and large sizes according to those to whom it is administered, for that which is administered in the cure of small children should be small; and for those whose anuses are narrow or painful, the chrism containers for them should be small. 
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of large and small christs:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the tube that is attached to the bag should be wide according to this method; and it should be placed at a distance where the bag is tied just so. 
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the lower end of the pus that is inserted into the buttocks is closed (so it is not open) due to inflammation; and on one side there are two tracks, and on the other side one track, and the width of the track should be according to the thickness of the rays, with the latter being slightly thicker. 
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And let there be a bag in which are placed the medicines of animal bladder or sheepskin, and its opening should be one palm wide.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be pierced with thick threads as it is turned; and if the space between the threads is the thickness of a finger.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then introduce into those tracks strong salt from fresh salt which is made of ten salts, or around those; and adjust with that the bag; and when the bag is placed on him, it should be tight at the head of the catheter between two distinct points with strong constriction; and then catheterize each track: But the quality of catheterizing thus is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be warmed according to the quantity of the patient's tolerance; and take care that it is not too hot nor too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And then the patient should be placed on their back, and raise their legs upwards and place them on a pillow or an elevation; and then grease the tip of the catheter with oil or egg white or fenugreek mucilage or similar substances; and then insert that into the anus easily, and then the assistant takes the bag and squeezes it firmly with both hands and repeatedly with force until all contents in the catheter are evacuated into the intestine; and then remove the catheter and the patient lifts their legs to the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine causes vomiting, let it be as much as possible; and if one sleeps with that for an entire night, it is better for recovery.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	And if you treat that person in the illnesses of diarrhea and the vomiting troubles him, then apply the cautery repeatedly until it is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if there are hemorrhoids or abscesses in the anus, then use a gentle and strong catheter, of the type with which children are catheterized. 
De curacio de las plaguas.	Of the treatment of the plagues.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	I have already said in the division of the treatment of the plagues what was appropriate for the book, and I say thus the treatment of those with hands and medicines according to the completion.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Thus, I say that the plagues are diversified according to how the plagues are caused and according to the location where the plaques fall.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes for which plagues are often caused are thus: throwing of stones, or cutting with a sword or knife, or striking with a lance, or with clubs, or with arrows, or similar to many such causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	However, the plagues that are in the parts of the body are thus: a plague that falls on the head, or the neck, or the foot, or the belly, or the thigh, and similar to those of the other limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I am recommending the treatment of some plagues so that you can apply that reasoning and rule to other plagues.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will begin with the simple ailments of the head, for the recollection of the compound ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Thus, when you encounter a simple ailment in the head and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it is due to a blow from a stone or similar, and already the vein has burst sufficiently and it is a severe injury and you fear an abscess may form, then you should be cautious and perform venesection of the cephalic vein immediately, and do not delay this; and withdraw as much blood according to the severity of the condition unless there is any contraindication for venesection, especially if the blood that has emerged from the wound is minimal.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And the venesection should be performed on the opposite side of the affected area; and ensure that the patient is protected from relapse and from wine and heavy foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if there is any contraindication due to caution, then reduce the amount of food and avoid meat and wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And place on the wound, if an abscess has formed, some wool soaked in olive oil or in wine that has been stypticated (treated with a styptic).
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	And if you are sure of a hot abscess, then place [the treatment] on the wound, if it is fresh with its own blood and the air has not changed that powder which I will mention shortly.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed that condition, then apply ointments until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	And if the wound is large or caused by a sharp and similar object, and the edges of it cannot be aligned with pillows, then align those edges with sutures as I will explain about suturing them.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	But if the wound has already exposed the bone and sinew, and it is not a retention but only a small suspension, then incise that area and subsequently treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh near the wound site. Command the patient to eat food rich in nutrients: broth and form a diet similar to those [foods], until it is healed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find putrefaction in the wound that does not adhere to the bone, then you should incise all of that rotten tissue and remove it, and subsequently treat the area.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	But if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which bleeding can occur, and it cannot be stopped by medicines, then you should probe the artery. If you find that it has not been cut, then incise it with a spatula, or tie it off; and if necessity arises such that what we have said does not work, then cauterize until the bleeding is stopped.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these sores are simple and small, then the cause of them is light; in this way you can sprinkle on those the powder, which should be applied before the air changes them. 
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the method of the powder is as follows: take oil of vipers one part, dragon's blood two parts, unextinguished charcoal three parts; let it all be ground and sifted, and with it fill the wound, and compress it well within so that it adheres properly, and let it clot with the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And then tighten that over with pillows and leave it like that, and do not loosen it while it remains thus until it is no longer inflamed, for the medicine within will not be expelled until it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes this is done alone as cautery, when you do not have access to incense and dragon's blood in your presence.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this method is used in treating large wounds when it is necessary to place it over them and keep them tight, especially fresh wounds with their blood, which have not been altered by the air.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, especially in summer, then it is not advisable to use this powder method. Instead, treat them with what we have mentioned, such as placing certain unguents over them, or applying flour mixed with water and honey until they putrefy; then treat them with another treatment until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	But if the wound is accompanied by a fracture in the bone, and it is small, then you should extract it with gestures [likely meaning careful manipulation or techniques].
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I will describe the cure for fractures of the head in what is poisonous.
De las plaguas del col.	From the afflictions of the neck. 
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	And if the ulcer occurs in the neck, then there is no difference in treatment, and it is the same as a simple ulcer on the head.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	If the nerves of the neck are cut or it is an artery, then if it is a nerve, treatment should not be applied to it with something that causes strong astringency, such as zinc and zegi which is vitriol and similar substances that bind tightly to the nerves and constrict them.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not apply any source of cold to the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold and their continuation leads to the brain, which is the most sensitive part of all the members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if one is treated with light medicines, such as washing with warm water, sometimes infused in oiled or un-oiled rose, and thyme when washed with warm water, along with other mineral stones according to this method, and apply moist unguents.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the wound is large, then administer suturing, or approximate the edges of it, and then treat it with powders until it heals.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	But if the wound has depth or you encounter pus in the lower part indicating gangrene, then puncture it at the most depressed area.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	If in the wound an artery has already been cut and bleeding is obtained, then separate or dry that one, tie that one, or cauterize that one if necessity prompts you to do so.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	But if you have already cut through the vertebrae of the neck or all of it, and the veins of the throat are saved, then bring together the edges of the wound with sutures over the bone of the neck without touching that; first equalize that and return it to its natural shape, then strengthen that with proper binding, and leave that for several days; then treat that with ointments in which astringency and stimulation are present until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	But if the wound has caused a fracture in the bone, then percuss that area. If there are fragments of bone in it, extract all those you can reach; and leave what you cannot remove until the wound purges itself, and let it separate, easing the swelling from it.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the wound is new, then sprinkle on it the powder that has been recommended to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	And if in the wound a fistula has formed, then cure that with what will be recalled shortly in its own chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Regarding wounds to the neck or similar when made between the shoulders, whether caused by a sword, knife, lance, or similar weapons.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a puncture from a lance or a sword, and you measure the depth of the wound, then consider whether gas escapes when the patient breathes; if so, know that the wound is mortal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is no deep penetration and the wound is fresh with its own blood, then within the first hour, you should apply powder to it; do not strain it so that the blood is not retained in the depth of the wound and returns to the heart, which could harm the patient. Instead, apply an attractive unguent to it and dress it twice a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the unguent is not available, then you should apply a dry cloth to the wound's opening to absorb the moisture that comes out. Have the patient lie in such a way that the wound is elevated so that whatever fluid is inside can drain out.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	If more than three days have passed since the plague has struck and you do not observe spasms, palpitations of the heart, or constriction of the throat in the patient, and other good dispositions are present, then you know that the plague is curable; and then treat it with poultices and other treatments until it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	But if the healing of it is delayed, and it has been open for a long time, then you know that a fistula has formed; therefore, treat it according to its chapter [meaning: follow the specific treatment described for such a condition].
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the wound is caused by a cut from a sword or knife, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or back, then treat it with suturing if it is large, or with powder if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	But if the bone has already become infected and there are pieces of debris embedded in it, then you should clean the wound and use tweezers to extract those pieces, if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	But if they are not separated, then leave them inside until the wound becomes putrid, which will make their extraction easier.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other accidental ailments in other parts of the body, the aid in treatment is the same as what we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the ailments of the abdomen.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The discomfort that occurs in the abdomen can be either severe, mild, or moderate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	In severe cases, you will see the intestine or the nerve of the intestine, because their insertion and the suture of them need to be more forceful and more delicate.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And a small rupture is made difficult by another method, and it is known that their reduction is more difficult if you do not attend to their insertion into their proper place promptly, because they swell and become enlarged, making the insertion difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	Therefore, the best rupture is moderate, for in that case, the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, just as it is difficult in the two previously mentioned types.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And know that the suturing of the abdomen is done in four ways, but two of these sutures are common and similar to those used for other ailments of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other specific sutures are related to those used for other ailments, but they are more specifically applied in the suturing of the abdomen.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I recommend to you each with explanation and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	So it is said that when the hernia is small and some part of the intestine protrudes because of this, and it becomes difficult to reduce it, then it is one of two ways: either due to the minor rupture as we have said, or when the intestine swells due to the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And so when it is thus, then you must soften that area by submerging a sponge or cloth in warm water alone, or boil water with squill, cyperus, and spice, and apply that to the intestine until the swelling is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And sometimes it is done in the way that has astringency, and it is better than water alone for reducing the swelling.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And so when you see the swelling resolved, then moisten the intestine with water in which alum and mallows have been boiled, for this alleviates the internal part of it with little harm.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	And if it is necessary to use the instrument for this treatment, then cut the area of disruption slightly with an instrument with which you would incise hemorrhoids.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first treatment is better when it is appropriate that there be no drying, and not to apply something to dry when it is near necessity and deficiency.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, make it in this form:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of the sharp wound, and the other part not-sharp, and the extremity subtle, and not be like the subtlety of a spatula, rather be slightly blunt.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And so when the inflammation is increased and the intestine is brought out, then it must be reduced according to its natural form, in its proper place, if that is possible, for that is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	And when the disruption is large and is in the lower part of the abdomen, then you must make the patient lie on their back, and raise their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then you raise the head and feet higher than the other parts.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then always keep your attention and consideration focused on this so that the part where the inflammation is becomes higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus you must administer this in severe inflammations and in moderate inflammations as well.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in small inflammations, apply what you have prepared, and then have the minister place themselves between your compassionate hands, who will hold the disruption entirely with their hand and adjust its edges, and then suture it from one end to the other as closely as possible. 
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the method of common suturing: first, take the needle, or a count of needles according to the quantity of the width of the wound; and then leave from the end of the disruption of the ring finger, and hold the needle firmly so that you do not place thread at both ends of the chain; with both ends of the clip which is left from the inside of the separated parts, until you make one penetrate through that part; and you have already added both ends of the chain and both ends of the clip, and thus four orders are made. 
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And then strengthen with double thread around the needle's circuit, and sometimes on both sides at once, and then join the two lips and the wound by a decent joining; and then leave the thickness of the finger and put another needle there, and then tie that with thread as was done with the first needle; and do not cease to do this if it is necessary with the needles until you have completed the entire constriction of the wound.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And let the needles be of moderate thickness between thick and thin, for thin needles lightly penetrate the flesh; and thick ones are difficult to insert into the wound, and therefore by this reason they should be of moderate thickness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And it is not necessary to insert the needle at both ends of the wound immediately, so that the flesh is not lightly cut and the wound can close before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And let the stitches not be too long so that the wound is not hindered from healing.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then sharpen the tips of the needles so that they do not disturb the patient during their sleep; and place on the sutures small pieces of cloth from all sides, which hold the ends of the needles; and leave them until you know that the wound is already healed.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And these types of stitching with needles in such a manner are more suitable for small wounds, where only one or two needles suffice for the stitching.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the second suture is common: it is that you administer with a suture the four extremities, of the chain and two extremities of the spine, at once, with a needle in which the thread should be wrapped equally in fineness and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And then when you have penetrated these four extremities with the needle, withdraw the needle from that same part where you began, so that the thread pulls out the pus from the deepest part to the wound, so that the suture is like a cloth suture with which the cloths are stretched.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And pause between each suture for the thickness of the little finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this suture is known to men. 
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And with such a suture, I sewed the wound which had been inflicted on a man in his belly that was struck by a knife, and it was the rupture of the wound larger than one palm, and it was like this: the intestines were about two palms around the middle area, and there was the disruption in the middle of the member; and then I returned it after the intestine had been outside the wound for twenty-four hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the plague was consolidated in the space of fifteen days or so, and cured that person who is healed; then this lasts for many years, and changes into its dispositions.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And the other doctors had judged that he could not be healed; and yet, by miracle, I cured him without using unguent, for I was in a place where no unguents were found nor any medicine, but placed my hand on the wound twice a day and washed it constantly with honey water until it was healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	And yet, I will describe two types of suture specific to the narration of Paraula.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And you should begin with chain stitching, and insert the needle from the outer part to the inner part.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And then, as the needle penetrates the chain and through that continuous line according to the length of the entire body, leave the end of the thread with which you inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate at the other end from the inner part to the outer part on the other end of the wound.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And then, after you have made that penetration, you will penetrate again in the same end of the wound from the outer part to the inner part; and leave the end of the thread on this side, and make the needle penetrate at the other end from the inner part to the outer part.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And penetrate with that your penetration with which you make that penetrate into the spine at the end of the sight which is in the part inside so that all of it penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then begin from this side of the wound and sew that with the end that is on the opposite side, and withdraw the needle from the chain through which it has penetrated, and then return that into that chain and sew the end of the wound that is on the other side with this outer part; and withdraw that from the chain that belongs to the patient.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this once and another time, and do this once again between times while you sew everything that is outside according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this method of suturing is that you sew with a hide suture with which I sew skins, in essence that you sew the wound once from the extremity of the chain, and that you leave that other time between until you have completed it.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	Here is the translation line by line for the provided text:
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	You should place the needle at the end of the thread near you from the outside part, and make that penetrate to the inside part in that area, and leave both ends of the suture; then rotate the needle and make it penetrate from the outside to the inside through both ends of the suture.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	Then rotate those sutures, and make each of them penetrate from the inside part to the outside part through both ends of the thread on the opposite side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this method of suturing is better than the common superficial suturing, and it is a suturing technique that precedes proper healing.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the text on gout.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And more specifically, for the suturing of the abdomen, it is corrected with two needles, each threaded with a single thread. Begin by inserting one needle from your side and make it penetrate to the other side according to the suturing method where the threads are tied equally tight.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And know that when the disruption is in the middle of the abdomen, then suturing it is more difficult than suturing other areas of the abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	But the judgment of plague treatment is a judgment of other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The sentence provided appears to be a mixture of languages similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Here is an attempt at translating it line by line into English:
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the wound, then apply ointments to that area which are present with you until they form a hard crust and expel the bile, and consolidate the bone and flesh; and treat it in this way as is the treatment for other wounds until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	And if the medicines are not present with you, then apply to that area immediately, for it begins to emit pus, like old matter, and change that twice a day, as you have been taught, until it is healed, for you do not need other medication in many conditions when the wounds are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	But if you fear that the wound may spread to the major limbs, then you must soak lion's wool in high-quality tempered oil or anointed oil, and apply that around the area between the joints and leave the bandages on.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if there is pain or putrefaction in the intestines, for it often occurs repeatedly, then treat that with a black styptic herb, especially if the corruption has spread to the intestine and has penetrated into its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that the one that is of the large intestine has a lighter healing process than the one that is in the small intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is difficult to heal because the intestine which is called “jejunum” does not easily recover from plagues that affect it entirely; and this is due to the large number of veins within it and its significant size, and because of the fineness of its structure, and its proximity in nature to nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	And if what you process from the plague is the membrane, and you obtain it fresh, reduce it according to your prescription with which you treat the intestines equally.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	But if it has passed into the space and has already turned green or black, then when you apply tension to that area with a probe over the part that is discolored, to cause blood to flow, because in the membrane there are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	Then incise what is another ligament nearby, and hold the two ends of the probe hanging from the diseased part, so that you can relieve the traction on it by lifting the membrane and releasing the arm of the disease.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembrance of the plagues when they happened in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When a small disruption occurs in the intestine, it is possible to restore it in some people; for this reason, I saw someone who was wounded in their abdomen by a lance strike and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old and had turned into a fistula, and thus there was pus and gas.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then I considered the treatment of him as though he was not confident in his recovery, but ceased to complicate that which had healed and the area had consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And I fear that if the area is already consolidated, it might happen that the patient suffers an unfortunate event in their abdomen; and they do not suffer from this unfortunate accident by remaining in their proper dispositions eating and drinking, and then entering into a bath and exercising as directed.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And already some experienced ones have said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, then it must be tied according to this method: take large-headed ants; then adjust the two edges of the wound and place an ant from those with its mouth open over the two edges of the wound; thus when it grips onto them and tightens its mouth, cut off the head of the ant, for it adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	Then place another ant next to the first one, and do not stop doing this with ants placed next to each other according to the length of the entire wound.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	Then bring the edges together and close the wound; let those heads remain attached inside the intestine until it is healed; do not cause any harm to the patient.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestine be sewn with fine thread made from the gut of an animal attached to it, since it is finer than a needle; you take the end of this gut thread, which should be stripped of its membrane, then tie the end of the thread tightly, wrap it, and then insert the thread into needles and stitch the intestine with them, bringing the edges together at the disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this method of sewing with ants is nothing but a second way of trust and hope. 
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the wound is large and widespread, especially if it is in one of the delicate intestines, for then it cannot be treated without a subtle procedure, and it does not result in complete healing.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	On the treatment of gout and fistula.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that any wound or abscess when it becomes old and corrupt, and turns into an ulcer, and does not heal but continues to discharge pus constantly without being separated, then, in whatever limb it may be, it is generally called a fistula and we call it by that name, azukem.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And a fistula, truly, is a moistened, hard, white nodule that does not cause pain and which has a concavity similar to the beak of a bird; and for this reason, we call it alcus rizatz, which means beak.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And in some cases, the fistula is moist, which discharges pus; and often, this moisture is eliminated within a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And at times, this moisture is thick, sparse, coarse, and subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already said in the division when I talk about wounds, that any ulcer which is not healed nor in fresh flesh, it is so for one of these causes: one of which is either due to lack of blood in the body; or by its own malice; or because between it and the lips there is hard flesh prohibiting the birth of new flesh; or because it is a light foreign matter; or because that ulcer in itself attracts dirt and the material that is within it is of bad quality; or because the medicine used for its cure is inappropriate; or when corruption falls into the region, and it becomes pestilence; or by the nature of the region as in Saragossa where the digestion of diseases is difficult, and the natural healing of abscesses is delayed; or because there is one bone or several bones within it.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	Here is the translation of the given line:
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And it is necessary that I make you understand the treatment of a fistula, which is done by surgical means with my hand.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And know that fistula can occur in all parts of the body; for among those are fistulas that affect large veins and arteries, or nerves, or the spine, or the intestine, or the bladder, or some of the ribs, or some of the vertebrae of the back, or some of the complex joints such as those of the hand and foot; and these are the ones that affect the proximity of the main body part and its likeness.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And therefore, among these fistulas that follow this manner, they are among the diseases difficult to heal, and do not receive cure; and the occupation with this is labor and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if there are some fistulas whose depth does not reach the locations mentioned, and you hope for and trust in their cure, and wish to understand them, then take a thread of wool or iron, and if the fistula runs straight, probe it with that.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	But if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a thin lead thread, for lead, because of the lightness of its body, is flexible and conforms to the twists.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula is filled with horrible matter, it is not possible for you to determine its nature by touching it.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then cleanse the openings through their own passages, for the moisture with which you cleanse that area should clear the other passages and flow out of them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	Then inquire carefully in whatever manner is possible for you to know if there are bones or nerves here, whether the cavity of the fistula is deep or shallow, or if it is a fistula that has multiple openings and is thus spread out. Examine the patient thoroughly with all your strength, through your examination, which involves compressing the area with your hand to determine the source of the pain, as well as discerning the signs and accidental causes related to the abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And after you have stood over all those causes with true understanding, now proceed to the treatment with confidence: consider whether it is an apparent fistula that is close or in a hidden place, deep within a joint, nerve, artery, vein, or one of the locations that I have mentioned to you.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	When you dry out the fistula as previously mentioned from the nostril of him, remove what is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and what has grown within the opening of the flesh, or of pus and similar substances, and care for the inside so that it may be healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	And if the fistula is of deep-seated origin and is straight, then it must be incised as far as possible, and then clean out all its corrupted flesh; then administer poultices wrapped in sharp medicines, and insert them into the cavity of the fistula which you have probed with an iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do this several times until the sharp medicine corrodes all that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula from the corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore it with ointments that will generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	And if it is not healed by this method, then you should cauterize it as we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the cause of the fistula is bone and you must be certain of this, then you should investigate it and dry it out as we have recommended, provided that you do not interfere with any vein or nerve or major body part, as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	And if the bone is exposed and there is some corruption and blackening in it, then you should scrape that area until all the corruption is removed; then treat it with something that will cause flesh to grow until it is healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if the arm is not healthy and clean as it should be, then you know that you have not fully eradicated the corruption; and then you re-examine it carefully and thoroughly investigate it and cleanse it with your last powerful means, and then restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And if it is healed, that is good; and if not, then you know that the corruption is in the deep part of the body, which has not been reached, and then there is nothing for you to do but to leave it alone.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is possible for you to remove it, then you should extract it with delicate forceps that are suitable for this purpose.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there are multiple bones [affected], then carefully extract all of them, and do not leave any behind due to lack of strength on your part.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if any cause of moisture hinders you, and there is neither fear nor error in the incision, then cut those ligaments or flesh that are present, and free the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	And if you are not prepared to set the bones of your patient, then place over the wound something that can poultice the wound, and leave it in such a way that this thing is around those bones of flesh and ligaments, and guard the wound so that it does not become solidified, and constrain the section which you have incised during your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	And if you fear, place over it a cloth soaked in oil or a cloth soaked in Egyptian ointment, or in some of the green ointments, for when those ligaments will be softened, and the bones are separated from their abduction, and that traction is alleviated.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	But if it is a large bone, such as the bone of the thigh or the hip or similar to those, and only the surface of it is corrupted, then scrape that area only with a sharp instrument until the blackness and corruption are removed, and then heal the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	But if the corrupted part of it is large, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that area by incising into the place where the corruption has spread, and then treat it until it becomes solidified.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend to you what happens to a man in his thigh so that you may use this as an example and assistance for your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then the time is extended due to the mistake of the doctors until the abscess is opened, and pus-like materials come out from it, and its healing is slowly achieved until the chest becomes fistulized, and many small holes are made in it through which all the putrefaction and moistures of the body flow out.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then the treatment lasted for many doctors around two years, and none of them knew more in the art until I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw the chest of the patient and the materials that were flowing out from those holes in large quantities; and already the body of that man was entirely wasted away and the color of it had turned yellow.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I inserted the probe into one of those holes and the probe reached the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	Then I thoroughly examined all the holes and found that they originated from various parts of the chest.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I prepared and incised one of those holes until I uncovered a part of the bone, and found it corrupted; it was already brittle, corrupted, and discolored; and a part of the chest had already been corrupted where it had penetrated into the marrow.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I sewed up what was exposed and prepared of the uncovered bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I suspected that the corruption was not in the bone but something else which I had already cut out and sewn up.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then apply the restoration of the wound with consolidating medicine for a long time, and it is not consolidated. 
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then I examine and uncover over the bone for a second time following the initial uncovering, and find continuous corruption with the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And recognize that which appears to me from that corruption, and then I was pierced performing the cure of him and restoration, and he is not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I uncover the other side and do not stop incising the bone little by little particularly and piercing its restoration, and it is not restored until I incise around about a palm of it, and that which is extracted with its marrow, and then restore it with medicines, and it is lightly consolidated and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And iteration in the operation and section of it is not necessary except due to the disposition of its frailty and the lack of tolerance and fear of death, for accidents happen at all times because of the excess of evacuation causing fainting.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And thus it is fully healed, and where there was bone, now durable flesh is found; and its disposition is well arranged in its body, returning its strength; and it is converted in its dispositions, and no contradiction occurs in movement nor harm in any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	But if there is an protruding bone in a previously injured part of the body, then you must section it according to this method: take a ligament and tie it tightly at the end of the protruding bone, and command someone to pull it taut; then use a thicker woolen ligature than the first one; then bind it over the flesh that is below the bone, and stretch its extremity so as to draw the flesh apart from it. Thus you uncover the flesh over the area where you wish to cut so that the saw does not touch the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And place a board or table under the bone properly, because when you do this, it is not forbidden to saw where the corrupted flesh does not adhere.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And it is necessary that the incision be made gradually over the corrupted area, because if the corruption is in the concavity of the bone and does not appear on its surface, it may require further incisions to access it.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, before the one part is connected with the other, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part of it, then you uncover the flesh from all sides completely; then place a stick underneath, and then tie that first part where the corruption is so that the suturing of the other part continues.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And let the suturing be according to the location of the corruption a little, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and tie the bone where it continues from the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not reasonable but rather a complication.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; however, you must investigate how the corruption appears to you, and you should open that area, and cleanse it according to whatever method is possible for you, and with every effort correct it, as long as it does not interfere with veins or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And know what the incisors and the saws for cutting these bones are like, as they vary according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of those, and the thickness of those, and the fineness and the largeness and the smallness of those, and the hardness and their rarity; therefore you must prepare every kind of operation with an instrument suitable for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And know that this operation requires you to be aware of the type of instrument you will need; when you have great study and long experience and knowledge of the methods of this art, and witness to the ways of illnesses, so that now you can apply what is appropriate for each illness from among the instruments.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And I have formed for you at the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will use as simple tools with which you will proceed in your practice, which you will apply to other cases.
Forma de serra:	Form of the saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Forma de autra serra gran:
Forma de ray:	Forma de ray:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	Make the head of this thread in the shape of a star-shaped nail head, and the points on it should follow the form of raised points.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it is not appropriate that only the ends of the joints be rubbed when they are corrupted, or if the mouth (likely referring to a wound or opening) is large and wide.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Form of razor larger than the others:
Forma de razori menor:	Form of a smaller razor:
Forma de razori lat:	It seems like the text provided is in an archaic or constructed language
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Here is the translation of the given line:
Forma de lu:	The given fragment "Forma de lu:" seems
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Form of the razor in which it has a concavity:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Form of razor or subtle method:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Form of another curved instrument for treatment:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Form of instruments with which bones are cut:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Forma de inscisori autra minor:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Form of another incision tool; this resembling a saw, and the end of it is like a scissors, and it is applied in various places along the ratio of the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio dequel que es perforat dels osses:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And the end of it is triangular and with a sharp point. 
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly all the causes that we have mentioned of razors and scissors and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of the incision of extremities and the suturing of bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	Extremities may become corrupted either by intrinsic or extrinsic causes; if you have treated that corruption with medicines and the cure does not work, or if the corruption spreads to a limb without any apparent cause, then you must incise that limb where the corruption takes hold, so that the patient might avoid death or severe malice which is a greater failing of the limb.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of the one who is affected is that the limb turns black as if it were already charred by fire, or you will notice the blackness spreading throughout that corruption within the limb which afflicts him and takes over the whole body; therefore, be cautious and incise that area.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly, if the corruption is caused by some venomous creatures such as sea scorpion, viper, or toad, and similar beings.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or infection is in the tip of the finger, then you must incise the finger and do not give space for the corruption to spread into the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly if you access the hand, then you incise that of the wrist area, and do not give space for corruption to enter into the arm's wrist.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if you need to do that, then cut into the arm between the elbow and the joint. 
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if the corruption spreads further and affects around the knee, then in that case it is the death of the patient; and to administer any other cause or treatment at this point is an amount of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly treat the foot when corruption overtakes the toe of the foot, then you incise it between one of the joints.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if you grasp at the instep of the foot, then you incise the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	And if it enters the knee, then you incise the thigh between the joint of the knee.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already spread over the knee, then there is no remedy but submission, and leave the patient to death.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the method of incising or amputating the limb is that you tighten the bandage at the part just below where you wish to incise, and tighten another bandage above the area; and have the assistant extend one bandage to the parts below, and extend another bandage by the assistant above; and you separate the flesh which is between two bandages so that the space between them is entirely exposed; then it should be incised or amputated.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And it is necessary that clean cloths be placed on all parts so that they do not touch the area directly, and that the patient receives a properly adjusted dressing and a cauterized abscess.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	But if blood flow occurs while you are operating, then you cauterize the area appropriately, or place on it some powdered substances to staunch the blood; and then return to your treatment until it is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then bind the injured limb with bandages as appropriate, and care for it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I recommend to you what happened to a man in his foot, this medical incident which I and you recommend, which is that an accident led to blackening in his foot due to burning that resembled fire combustion.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that accidental corruption first occurred in his toe and then spread to the entire foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepared himself medically for pus to help the healing of the limb with the intensity of pain and burning he was experiencing, and he cut that foot up to the joint, and the fire healed it. 
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	A long time ago, that corrupting infection affected the index finger of the hand.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then I prevailed, and thus was able to expel that excess through what I applied with the hand of medicines, approaching the purification of his body; and the excess did not rebound but began to move towards another finger within which it had begun in the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And he urged me to cut his hand, but I did not want to do so, hoping for the expulsion of that excess, and more because I feared the cutting of his hand would cause the patient's strength to be completely lost, as the patient’s condition was already precarious.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And since he lost hope in me, he returned to his land, and it came to my knowledge that this man prepared and cut his entire hand, and was healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have included this narrative only to be helpful regarding what can be done about this disease, and to provide an understanding of it, according to which action should be taken.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	On the treatment of sinuses and the nature of enemas with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess occurs in fleshy members and the space of the abscess is extended until it collects pus, and then it bursts and perforates, and the pus comes out of it, leaving the place empty as if it were a vessel, and the skin that is over it is like a thin cloth, and no corruption has reached behind, and it does not imprint on the bone or in nerves nor in ligaments, it is called sinu, and it is not named fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	However, if the space is extended until corruption imprints on some member, then it is called a fistula and not sinu.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the treatment of it is that you incise that skin entirely as it has turned, and especially when it has become thin like cloth, and ensure that it does not adhere to the area due to its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	However, if you expect that the skin will adhere and that such corruption has not succeeded in reaching behind with further consequences, and there is a passage through the skin, then you should treat it with aclyster (enema).
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And when you consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the arm that you use should be fragrant, then enema this with an Egyptian medicine which consists of equal parts of sweet oil, good wine, and honey, mixed together in one vessel, and heated over a fire until the medicine becomes warm and reaches the consistency of honey.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	Then take the necessary amount of that medicine and dissolve it in water and honey; then administer it as an enema to the sinus, strengthen the openings of it, and leave the medicine inside for a quantity of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	Then extract that with a scraper; do this for several days until the sinus is cleansed and the pus is completely removed.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And sometimes it is administered as an enema with ashes water when this medicine is not available to you; in which case, you should take the ash of vines and put it into water; then strain that and use it as an enema until you are convinced that the sinus is now clean.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the ash water, then administer an enema with water and honey, mixed with ground honeycomb, and also use a mixture of wine and honey for the enema. The property of honey is to cleanse and wash, and the wine helps to bind the sinus, especially when the wine has an excess of astringency and dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you do this several times and are convinced that the sinus is already cleaned out, then cleanse it using something that promotes flesh growth.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And it is that you take unguent of hyssop and dissolve that with rose oil and styptic wine; or that you administer an enema with some medicines and apply other ointments that have the properties which I have already written about in the treatise on ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the sinus opening is narrow such that the enema tube cannot be inserted, then you gradually enlarge it with a small iron tool, and place a cloth wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it is enlarged.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And similarly, if the opening is too wide, then you sew the edges together and leave enough space for the enema to enter properly.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the opening from which the fluid flows is elevated towards the upper parts, then dry that area at the lowest point of it so that the fluid can flow out, because when the fluid is constricted in the depth of the sinus, the flesh there can generate more fluid.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinus around the lower bone as you wish, then you must prepare the limb with a treatment that allows the fluid to flow out easily according to what is available to you and ensure that no cause of obstruction remains within it.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidating medicines that are placed upon the appropriate vein for which you want to extend them over a piece of cloth.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the cloth should be of such quantity as to cover all the sinus; and then cut with the scissors at the center of the sinus opening slightly wider than the sinus opening; and then spread another cloth under it according to the size of the incision, and place it over near the distant part of the sinus opening so that the secretion from the arm can be alleviated, and do not change the large cloth but only once every few days.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	And the cloth that is over the sinus opening should be changed frequently so that what comes out from the arm can be properly absorbed.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you may know whether what flows from the arm is much or little, or if it is digested or undigested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And with this, you should consider the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if there is an abscess in it.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And as your treatment is prolonged in this manner, when you see the material that has been placed over the sinus opening has already adhered or is about to adhere, then change it every third day. When you remove the dressing, change the cloth and renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	More if from the sinus nearby there is subtle poison, then do not despair of its adhesion, for its healing approaches, for some men in whom the generation of flesh on their wounds takes longer, and of those in whom the opposite occurs.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if for several days the undigested matter from the sinus is discharged, then you know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and becomes a prolonged cause, then you should apply drying medicines, and if the medicines are moist in their substance and virtue, they should be dried like ointment diafinicon, when applied to adjust the excess addition of moisture.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the most recent method for treating it is to take some euphorbium ointment and dissolve it in rose oil, and apply it over the area as if anointing with its substance, then warm that area with it, and use that.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And it appears like this in that action, when there is no arm involved, according to diagnosis, honey which should be boiled until it thickens, and use it; or take myrrh and aloes and ensaios (a type of resin), mix all and sprinkle over the honey while it's on the fire, then spread this mixture over cloth and tie that over the wound; and spread that with the honey which you have cooked until it thickened, sprinkle over cloth and bind that.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And sometimes they are administered with long aristolochia, roots of celestial lilies (which are celestial lilies), flour of rue, and centaury. Use these simples or compounds, mix them, sieve them, and sprinkle over the honey which has been boiled; then use it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the wound is prolonged and does not heal with this treatment, then you know that the corruption is in the base of it, and now make an examination of the bones or other hard members or ligaments; then cure it with fistular treatment, as was said above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	On the treatment of felonies and infected nails, and the incision of the finger added and severed.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Panarici is an abscess that arises from under the nail of the thumb or toe, and it can also arise in other fingers. As it prolongs and its cure becomes less esteemed, or it becomes a hardened abscess, or it corrupts, and pus is thrown which corrodes the base of the nail, and it corrupts all of it, and by its corruption it reaches to the bone causing an offensive odor, and the extremity of the finger becomes crooked, and its color turns black.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And so when you have that abscess in the area we mentioned during the division and your treatment does not improve, then you must incise with an iron all the excess that remains of the nail, and then cauterize the wound nearby, for a hot cautery is helpful in this.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	However, if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, but the edges of the nail are already pressing into the flesh at the sides, and begin to pierce and damage it, then you must place a thin wire under the edge of the nail that is piercing the flesh, and push it up and incise that part of the flesh easily. Place over what remains of the flesh medicines that are burning and corrosive until it is completely removed; then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	But if the corruption has already entered into the bone, then you must cut into the bone and extract it, for it will never be healed as long as the corrupted bone remains within.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the corrosion and corruption have spread to the finger, then you must cut it at one of its joints according to the likelihood of its recovery, and then care for it until it heals.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	But if the nail suffers from trauma or friction, and there is severe pain in it, then at the beginning you must perform bloodletting on the patient, and then dry the nail with a sharp spatula using a transverse section from top to bottom. Be careful that the cut does not penetrate into the flesh beneath the nail, for you will cause severe pain to the patient, and it may lead to excessive growth of skin around the area; then treat that spot with something that relieves pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	However, the finger that is commonly found in many men is largely fleshy throughout, partly bony, and partly nail.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some of them are located at the base of the joint, or their growth is in some of the finger joints.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	More than those who are born with weak joints do not suffer, and those who are born with strong joints feel more pain.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those that are fleshy, the incision is superficial, and it is such that you should incise just at its base with a broad spatula.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	More from those who are born with a condition in the base of the joint, the cure is difficult; and therefore guard against amputating it.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	And when consolidation occurs among the veins or arteries due to the nature of the human born in this way, or by the consolidation from an illness, or by burning from fire, or by similarity (of causes), then it is necessary to dry out that consolidation before the veins return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And then place between their sheets some cloth soaked in oil so that they are not lightly adhered together, and separate them, or place between them a thin sheet of lead until it is properly consolidated. 
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly, if you encounter swelling on the palm of any hand, then dry that swelling according to how it is prepared and adjust it to the shape of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	From the beginning of vices, these are varicose veins.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Vices are varicose veins, and they are large, twisted veins filled with excess melancholic fluids that appear in the limbs of the body. They most commonly occur in the legs, especially in the legs of travelers, workers, and those who carry heavy loads.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Then it is necessary that you administer a purge of black bile several times with strong evacuation, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	The treatment of these conditions with iron can be done in two ways: one is to incise and draw out the black blood, and the other way is to elevate the vein and extract it entirely.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The procedure is as follows: first, wash the leg with warm water to dissolve the thick blood, which is feculent in the leg. Then, bind the patient's leg tightly at the highest part of the thigh towards the knee area using a bandage. Next, dry the vein at one, two, or three spots with an incision, and then draw out the black blood by pressing your hand from below the leg upwards and downwards until the desired amount of blood is extracted, which the patient's strength can tolerate.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then apply water to her, and command her to abstain from foods that generate black bile. 
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And repeat the treatment by phlebotomy when the veins are full and inform the patient. 
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	Here is the translation line by line:
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then dry the vein in the right place for ligation either along its length or at its rear end where you feel the pain, or at its lower part where you find the swelling. 
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then apply the chain with hooks and squeeze the vein from all sides until it becomes visible to the touch, and you should appreciate the change in color as it tends towards blackness.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And then, as you untie, from the chain, you take that white one which is a string.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then you place it inside where it is elevated and laid out from the chain, and suspend it with an ounce of lion's fat.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then make another incision near that incision for three fingers, and then pull the thread from the site above the vein where it appears. 
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then elevate that and incise it at the back section below the heel, and then extract that and lift it until it is removed through the second cut, and then extract that from the section which is above it.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do this until you extract that from the section which is the highest of all the sections, until everything is removed; and then incise that.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you cannot extract and elevate it, then insert a needle with a strong double thread and tie that and pull it out, or insert the probe there and rotate your hand in all directions until it is detached.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And be careful that it is not cut; for if it is broken, it will be difficult for you to lift it out and it may harm the patient.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And once everything has been completely removed, then place on the wound a cloth soaked in wine and oiled and un-oiled olive oil, and treat it until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vein is contracted with a tortuous shape that coils around the parts, and it is not straight as we have said, then you must make incisions along all the twisted parts of it and at the coiled areas, and then suspend it with hooks until you lift it out completely.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And be careful with your incision so that you do not cut into the vein and do not damage it, for it will be difficult for you to repair it; use your wisdom in this matter.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Based on the structure and vocabulary of the text provided, it seems like an early Romance language with influences from Latin. The sentence can be translated as follows
Forma de unci orp:	It appears there might have been a typo in your message. Assuming you meant 
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	And here is the translation line by line:
De extraccio venae cruris.	From the extraction of the vein from the leg.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the chests of people in hot lands, such as in Al-Andalus in the land of Arabs and in the hot and dry lands of India with little moisture, where there is no grass or tree. 
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And often it is generated in other parts of the body besides the thighs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And the gestation of it is putrefaction that comes from the chain, just as serpents and worms and weevils and maggots are generated between the chain and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of the susceptibility to the occurrence is this vein where you find inflammation in the chest; and then the area becomes blistered; and afterwards, the vein starts to emerge from the location of that blistering which resembles a leaf blade.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And when the extremity appears from him, then it is necessary that you wrap around it a piece of lead whose weight is one drachm within two drachms, and attach that and leave the lead hanging from the bed.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And as many times as you need to keep it in place from the outside parts, wrap that with lead and secure it.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the wound is prolonged, then you incise a part of it and wrap the remainder; and do not cut that which has been inflamed until it comes out, for if you incise that which is contracted, it enters into the flesh and causes an abscess and putrefaction in the area and a bad ulcer.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	For it is necessary that it be treated gently and extracted little by little until it is completely removed from the wound, so that no cause for further issues remains in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And in some men, this vein extends to a length of five palms and ten digits, though I have heard of one reaching twenty palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is incised during its treatment, then insert the probe into the channel and perforate that with a long probe through the flesh until all of the matter inside is evacuated, and apply putrefaction to the area for several days using medicines; then treat it according to the treatment for abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein sometimes has branches, especially when it approaches the joint of the foot or in the foot itself, and it comes out through multiple openings, with a branch extending from each opening.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And therefore treat it in this way as we have said in the division and with what has been said above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Regarding the section on worms generated under the skin and it is called bovine disease.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is called in some regions the bovine disease because small white spots appear on the buttocks, and it is a worm that lives between the skin and the flesh, traveling throughout the body up and down, and its presence is felt as it moves from one member to another until it breaks through the skin and comes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its generation is due to the putrefaction of certain humors, just as worms, serpents, and worms like roundworms andascarids are generated in the stomach.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared for its maliciousness, for when it travels through the body and reaches the head, and gets to the eye, then it causes great pain within it and enters, destroying the eye, which results in white spots appearing.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And therefore, when you wish to treat it and extract it, it cannot be done without feeling its movement and appearance. Then you must tightly bind what is above it and below it with strong bandaging and constriction, and then dry it out and extract it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is embedded in the flesh and you do not find it, then place a heated cautery over the area where it lies, and the greatest fear is corruption of the wound, which corrupts the area as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	And if you see that it has reached close to the eye, then press strongly over the eyebrow with a tight bandage, and then dry it out, and extract it; and the patient must use purgatives to evacuate bad putrid humors from their body, and they should avoid foods that generate putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	Regarding the treatment for nausea.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is called nafir in our land, and it is pain that comes to some members, and then changes from member to member.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And I have already seen that second thing which I will recount to you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was called to a sick woman in a village, and I uncovered her arm and saw a small swelling in the vein of her arm. After remaining there for about an hour, I observed that swelling rise up as if it were wax moving from one place to another, but more lightly than before, as if it were live silver flowing from one place to another.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then the pain moved to that area and settled into the muscle, and remained there for about an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then it spreads to the other side of the body until it reaches the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then I observed that it moved throughout her entire body as I saw; and I was greatly amazed by the transformation and the speed at which it traveled from one member to another.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had seen this before in my other patients in the same manner; however, I have seen many cases where the pain is transferred from one limb to another.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But do not see this with the fingers as in the woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I do not think this is anything other than because of this that the woman was weak, or rather of dry body and exposed veins, and in this condition felt this altered wind.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that this reverse cure does not appear in those who are delicate and have a moist body with engorged veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you want the cure of him, and the patient feels that pain, then it is not apparent to you as we have said, then you press on that place lightly and incise into it until that compressed air comes out, and cauterize the area.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not feel it with your own hands, then treat it with body percussion and by expelling gas, and purge those areas with foul-smelling pills and pills of senna and the like.
De extraccio de sagetas.	On the extraction of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are diversified according to their types, and according to the parts of the body in which they strike, for their diversity is such that some have large points, and small ones, and concave ones, and blunt ones; and there are those with three angles, and among them are those with barbs; and among them are those with crossbars.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And that which is according to the members and parts in which they strike is in two ways: for the members are either principal vessels, such as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, intestines, bladder, and their likes; and thus when it strikes one of these members and signs of death appear to you, which cause I will recount shortly, then it is necessary that you avoid extracting that arrow in those cases where death would occur in the most critical conditions. And when these bad signs do not appear to you, and the arrow is not hidden deep within the member, then you extract that arrow and treat the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And of the signs of the skull is when an arrow strikes it, pierces the bone, and exits through the cyphus which is above the brain. For you will experience severe headache, blindness, dizziness, heat in the eyes, inflammation and heat of the tongue, spasms, confusion of understanding, vomiting of bile, sudden loss of speech, destruction of voice, and a white, humid substance resembling powder will exit from the wound location, and the appearance of the flesh around it will become moistened.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And when these signs appear to you, then you should abstain from the treatment and extraction of the arrow, unless it is necessary.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	And the signs of the arrow when it hits the heart, so that it is near the left nipple, and you feel that it is fixed in a hard place, not a soft one; and the movement of the arrow resembles the pulse's movement, and black blood flows from the wound, and there is coldness in the extremities, and cold sweat, and fainting; therefore, you know that death will come quickly.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the signs when the arrow has wounded the lung are spitting of frothy blood from the wound, and the vessels near the neck are inflamed, and the color of the patient changes, and they expire a large spirit, and they seek a draught of fresh air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow strikes the membrane that is in the feet, and the pain is then near the small bones, and there is a great swelling with intense pain and sighing, and not all the muscle parts are affected.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if you find an arrow in the stomach, then extract it from the infected food that is indigestible.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the arrow is stuck in the abdomen and embedded within it, you should make an incision at the site of the wound, or on the skin, or into the intestine that has been ruptured, and there is no hope for the extraction of the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow pierces the bladder and urine is discharged externally, and some process from it causes issues externally, and severe pain occurs in the patient, then you know that it is mortal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	When the other members as well, such as the face, neck, jaw, shoulders, armpits, vertebrae of the back, collarbone, thigh, breast and similar parts of the limbs, are saved according to the major dispositions when the arrow does not find a vein or artery and is not a venomous arrow. 
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I will recount to you what I have seen of the nature of these arrows, so that you may understand their significance for your treatment.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause is that in a man, an arrowhead embeds itself in the lacrimal duct of his eye at the root of his nose, and I extracted it from him through the other side, leaving the earwax intact, and he was healed, and no harm came to his eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And extract another arrow from a Jew who was struck in the eye region of his face, leaving the eyelid more open, and the arrowhead was already embedded and could not be removed except for a small part to which you attach to his shaft, and it was a large sharp arrow of the Turks, with a lion design on it that had no ears.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And it is beneficial for the patient, and not accidental in his well-being an unfortunate event.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man who had been shot in the throat, and it was an Arab arrow, and that is the one with ears; and then I incised around it between two guides, and it was already submerged in his throat; and then I maneuvered it carefully with that, and then I removed it, and the Christian was healed.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And he extracted another arrow from a man who had been shot in his belly, and thought that he would die because of it; and thus, after thirty days had passed and there was no change regarding him due to any cause related to his condition, he cut into the arrow and engaged with it, and he was healed, and no bad accident happened to him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw another man in whom an arrow was embedded in his back, and the wound had healed over it; and after about seven years, the arrow came out from the root of his thigh.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman in whom an arrow was embedded in her belly, and the wound had healed over it, and there was no change in her condition because of it, and the woman did not suffer any harm in any of her natural functions.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And I saw another man in whom an arrow was embedded in his face, and the wound had healed over it; he broke off the arrow, feeling no pain, and similar cases have been observed.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And he extracted the arrow from the man, who was a leader of the king, with the arrow embedded in the middle of his nose, which had slightly shifted to the right side, and the entire arrow was concealed.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called for the treatment near the site of the arrow wound within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I found the arrow's wound to be quite narrow; and then I searched for it with a thin probe, but did not feel it; however, he felt a prick near his right ear, and then I suspected that this pricking was due to the tip of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I applied a poultice with a dressing that has attractive and digestive properties, believing that the area will become inflamed so that the site of the arrow becomes apparent, thus acting upon it.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And there was no significant accident in the area where the arrow had reached; and I continued with the dressing on it for many days, and no accidents occurred; and during this time, the wound healed, and the patient recovered from the injury for many days until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose and reported this to me.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then I applied a sharp and corrosive medicine to the wound for many days until it opened up, and with a probe, I examined it, and found the tip of the arrow embedded there, which adhered to the bone.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then I adjust in the opening of the wound with that sharp medicine until the tip of the arrow becomes visibly apparent to me, and I proceed at my own pace with this for the duration of time between four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And then increase the heat and allow it to be such that I can insert the scissors into it, and remain there, and not obey the impulse to withdraw, for I did not cease to subtlety manipulate and ingeniously work on it in various ways of craft, until one day I managed to grasp it with forceps skillfully made, according to how the design of those will be shown at the end of this chapter, until I extracted it; and then I restored that wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors judged that the nasal cartilage could not be restored, but I restored it and the wound was consolidated, and the patient was healed completely, and there was no need for any further intervention.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recommend to you the quality of extracting some arrows for which you should pause and consider the meaning behind what I have not said, because the parts of this art and the definitions thereof are not understood through mere narration nor are they fully grasped by reading the book.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the wise artisans compare a little with much; and what is present with what is absent; and they find new operations and new instruments by tracing back to the foreign causes of the art when such occurrences happen.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore I say that arrows are not removed from the members in which they are embedded except in two ways: either by attraction of the place where they enter; or by the opposite at the other end.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is expelled from where it entered, or is a discharge coming from a fleshly area, and is thrust out and forcefully expelled.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if you do not obey the timing of when to cut, then it is necessary that you leave it for several days until the flesh around it becomes rotten, and the attraction to it is lessened and its expulsion is eased.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And similarly, if it is embedded in bones and does not respond to treatment, then leave that for several days and repeat the process with traction and movement every day, and it will be dislodged.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if it does not respond to treatment for several days, then you must drill around the trajectory of the arrow in that bone from all sides with a fine tool until the area around the arrow is enlarged, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrow is embedded in the bone of the head and has penetrated one of the ventricles of the brain, and the patient exhibits several of those symptoms that I mention, then refrain from extracting the arrow and leave it inside until the patient's condition stabilizes for several days; because if the arrow reaches the spinal cord, death will not be long in coming.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is embedded only in the body of the bone and does not penetrate into the spinal cord, and the patient remains stable for several days without exhibiting any of those symptoms, then you should focus on the extraction of the arrow and on treating the patient.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Here is the translation line by line:
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	Here is the translation line by line:
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot reach it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the arrow, and there are no bones or nerves or veins here, then you should incise the wound until it is widened so that it is possible to extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if there are earrings with which it is held, then you should free the flesh in which it is embedded entirely using all the means you can; and devise a method for this, if you cannot remove the flesh due to the fracture of the earrings or their torsion within where they are stuck.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in whatever location it is, then you should use the twisting of your hand with forceps in all directions until it obeys; and be subtle with the utmost subtlety so that the arrow does not break and to make the extraction easy for you.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot do it at that moment, then leave it for several days until the parts around it can soften, and then repeat the procedure when it has been alleviated.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	But if there is excessive bleeding, then you should administer the treatments we have mentioned in the relevant chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And observe the source of your incision from veins or nerves, or tendons, and administer treatment in every possible way for the extraction of the arrow; and do this with ease and calmness and slowness and firmness as I teach you and as is recommended to you.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And therefore make the arrow contract in such a way that it conforms to the figure according to which you should direct the tip of the arrow into the patient, for this is more beneficial.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	But if this is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you according to the circumstances.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	But the arrows that are shot by the opposite side of another part, or if you have already processed some part to the outer parts, or make the tip of the arrow sticky due to the sensation from the part above the prescribed chain and sometimes elevate it; then you cut on that spot; and let the cutting be according to the amount in which the forceps take hold; and then pull it out, for it is made light to removal.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	But if it is retained in the bone, then you twist it according to the opposition within which the arrow penetrates the bone, and widen it as you go, and then extract it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if not, leave it for some days, and then try to extract it again when it comes out.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the shaft of the arrow is in there, then you push it out with it.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	But if the shaft has fallen off and you want to administer an impulse, then insert something into it, if it is deaf (closed), use a conical instrument so that its concavity enters into the notch of the arrow, and then push it out with it.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	And if the arrow is concave, then you should forcefully push it into the wound, because the arrow is lightened by that.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the arrow is embedded, then you must hollow out all the flesh in which the tip is lodged, if it is possible for you to do so, and then treat that area with whatever is appropriate.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the arrow strikes the foot, or the abdomen, or the bladder, or the side, and is close enough that you can touch it with your hand, and it is possible for you to cut around it, then cut around it and be careful not to injure a vein or a nerve, and extract it, and then treat the wound if necessary, and care for it until it is healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Method of using forceps with which arrows are removed:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Let the ends of them be like a bird's beak, which are made like a pincers so that they grasp the arrow without letting it go.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And of those, various special sizes are made, large, small, and medium, according to the size of the arrowhead and its thinness, and the width of the wound, and the constriction of the area.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Form of treating a swollen extremity:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	And in this way, so that the instrument inside him is lightened in the concave groove and pushed by it.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	From the phrase "De fleubotomia de las venas," it appears to refer to a medical
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	Here is the translation line by line based on the provided text:
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	Here's the translation of the given text line by line into English:
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot and thigh there are three veins; one of those is below the curvature of the wild thorn bush; and the second is sophena, and its location is below the thigh of the domestic animal; and the sciatic vein, and its location is below the thigh of the wild animal; and in the thigh are other veins similar to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The healing of veins near the ears is for cleaning ancient and foreign obstructions, and scaly and ulcerous conditions of old on the head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of bleeding them is as I recommend to you: shave the head of the patient and rub the back of the patient's head at the occiput in the area where both veins are with a wide cloth using good friction; then bind the patient’s neck with a bandage between which appear the two [veins] and their locations are near the ears, at two points slightly beneath the hairline; and seek those [points] with your finger, and if you feel the pulse of those with your finger here, it is a sign when touched.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then take the lancet, which is sharp, and insert it into the vein in the crook of the arm until the bloodletting reaches the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	Then raise your hand with the vein and the arm toward the parts above and incise the vein with a sharp incision.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And the length of the incision should be the width of two fingers put together or around that; and let as much blood come out as you wish.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then bind it with poultices and leave it until it is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And already at the beginning of the book, mention has been made of those and their cautery.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence, line by line:
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of performing phlebotomy on them is as I recommend to you: have the patient tilt their head forward until the two veins become apparent by sight and are distinctly visible, and place your finger over their pulse; then you can begin with the incision.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then you lift the chain above the vein at the points above with your index finger, and insert the flebotomi [phlebotomy] instrument there, and elevate the vein upwards; and incise it in this way as you have done with the other two veins; and let blood according to the quantity necessary for you.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then release the compression on the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, and then apply a bandage and pillow and tighten it above with strong pressure, and leave it until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And the recall of them is already preceded, and from those the incision, and the attraction at the beginning of the book. 
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And thus the treatment of venesection from the frontal vein is similar to the venesection of the cephalic vein for old facial diseases and migraines and burns and foul-smelling ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of the venesection is as I recommend to you: so that the patient strains their neck with a band until the vein appears; and then take the instrument named the lancet, which has this form:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Place the sharp point of the lancet at the head over that vein and strike it with force or by another means in the proper manner, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you wish; then dress the puncture wound of the patient and keep it strained until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And sometimes it is opened with a lateral venesection, but the venesection should not have an acute end like other lancets; instead, it should have a blunt end, and perform the venesection transversely because the bone is close and strong, and a sharp venesection would break there.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	And for the treatment of the two veins that are at the tear ducts of both eyes due to inflammation and swelling in the eyes, and for illnesses of the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of phlebotomy is that the patient holds their own neck with a bandage, and then you perform phlebotomy on them, and you stand over the patient's head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And the phlebotomy should be performed transversely along a little length with a small phlebotomy tool, because there is no flesh in that area; and if the phlebotomy tool is thin, break off its tip slightly.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then let blood flow as much as is necessary for you, and place something over those cuts, and bind them tightly for one night, and then loosen them.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	And the venesection of the nasal vein is particularly effective for acute fever and violent heat, and for diseases of the face and migraine and swelling that occur in the face, especially when they are chronic.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of the venesection is such that the patient holds their head, and then you place your left hand under their nose, and take a slender long needle and insert it into the middle part of the nasal tip precisely, because the vein does not appear to the touch here, and blood begins to flow immediately.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	You must slowly withdraw your hand with the small needle and let blood flow according to your need; then bind it for one night, because it heals quickly.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	However, the venesection of both jugular veins is beneficial for alleviating swelling and the onset of leprosy and various other diseases, impetigo, and severe corrosive ulcers, as well as herpes.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of the phlebotomy for them is that the patient stretches each one out in their own place with bandages; and the surgeon stands over the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a stool.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And then perform venesection on the vein with a wide-bore lancet little by little; and then withdraw blood in a measured quantity or according to what you deem necessary for this case; and then do the same with the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then loosen the ligature and slightly tighten the two veins with a moderate tourniquet so that the patient is not suffocated, and leave it in place until the plague is healed. 
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the benefit of bloodletting from the larger veins is to treat small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums, bad ulcers and fissures, and also bad ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of the phlebotomy of these is that you place the patient in front of you, and tightly bind their neck with a bandage, and then separate their lips and look at two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the second on the left; and the indication of each is by the darkness of each of both, and this more so appears in the circumference where smaller black veins are present; and then incise each with an incising incision.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	And if you have doubt, and do not know which one of those [areas] it is, then you should proceed with an incision on the larger of those areas, and from that, the pus will become evident.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make the appearance of the two veins that are above the lips [this translation assumes a possible error or metaphorical language in the original text, as it seems unusual for medical treatise to refer to veins on
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	And it is customary to cut the two veins that are below the lip.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	More than two veins that are below the tongue, the treatment is close to the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein for suffocations that occur in the throat, the illness of the uvula, and illnesses of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of fleubotomar them is that you follow the patient between your hands before the sun, and lift their tongue, and observe its sides, one side being vein-like and the other side vein-like, and the color of each is declining to black.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then bleed each one; and be careful not to keep your hand too long while bleeding them, because those are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the veins that are bled in the calf are those where it is customary to bleed all men, and their bleeding is done in two ways: either by placing the bleeding needle with an olive or a myrtle twig of decreasing fineness; or by cutting with a surgical knife, which they call alnessil, and this is its form:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this instrument is what you need for the incision and those particular types of thin and delicate ones according to the width of the veins and according to the tightness of them.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of phlebotomy (bloodletting):
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	And in this way, open the veins similarly as usual, and it is necessary to open the sunken veins that are full and have thick and noticeable contents, and those that contain thick clotted blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the form of olive oil flebotomy:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this flebotomi is of lesser width and has a finer tip, and it is suitable for the flebotomy of fine veins that contain thin blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it is necessary for the phlebotomist, when performing phlebotomy on that area, to be very careful and have a great fear of making a mistake there because the artery lies beneath. If he makes an error and pierces with the phlebotomy needle where the artery is located, he will cut that artery and cause a flow of blood; therefore, one must not puncture that area with a phlebotomy instrument but rather use a cutting tool like an incision.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilica vein does not appear by clear manifestation, then you must leave that area and move to another one, or seek some other vein nearby; or perform phlebotomy at the end of the arm where it is visible; and cut it with a phlebotomy instrument as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	But if you wish to perform phlebotomy on the patient, then before constricting the arm, touch the area between where you know the pulse is located, and then press on it with your thumb; then stretch out the arm and cut the vein with a concave incision using a phlebotomy instrument as we have said; and be careful not to hit the artery by mistake in that area.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you see, as you tighten the bandage, swelling in the place where you have pressed with your finger, then that swelling is from the artery, and therefore it should be avoided.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you see the blood flow during phlebotomy as thin and red like a child's urine, then know that it is arterial blood; and then you should touch and place your finger on that spot for a long time; and then remove your finger, and if the blood stops flowing in spurts, which often stops in spurts, then you strengthen the arm and leave that area alone.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And protect the patient from their own mucus, and keep them in a state of warmth without moving them for several days until they are healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	But if the blood does not stop flowing in spurts, and if there is no medicine available to you at that time, then incise the artery if it is accessible; for the extremity is contracted, and the blood stops. Or take a piece of linen, and use that, taking one half and applying it tightly over the vein with a tourniquet and using pillows until the next day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the blood stops flowing in spurts, that is good; and if not, then treat it with methods previously mentioned for stopping the spurted flow of blood from the affected area.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the bleeding from it is difficult in many conditions because of the small space of the wound and the possibility of arm movement.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	Here is the translation line by line:
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And the phlebotomist must avoid that which is above in the phlebotomy of the patient, because there lies a nerve; and if it happens that this nerve is hit during the puncture of the phlebotomy, it will cause stupor to the patient, and healing becomes difficult for him, and often he is not healed completely. And this nerve sometimes appears in sensation; and if it is hidden from some people and is subtle and does not show itself, then you must hold the phlebotomist with whom you perform phlebotomy using a splinter of alnessil [likely a type of wood or tool], and avoid the nerve with your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then you should open the vein along its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The benefit of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it attracts blood from the head and helps with illnesses of the eyes.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And it is proper in this case, if you want the phlebotomies to be done with an olive phlebotome or with a myrtle phlebotome; for it is the safest of all veins, for there are no arteries nor nerves there.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	But nevertheless, you must pay attention to the phlebotomy so that with the phlebotomy needle, you do not just pierce the head of the lizard, and seek the area more superficially, and do not go too deep into it, unless it is found with the first percussion which should be above where the phlebotomy will be done several times.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	And although it often happens that an abscess is present in some people, when it does not burst with the first percussion, do not neglect to address that abscess. 
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	But the quality of the phlebotomy and its accidents are numerous, in which one must think about their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first line discusses the conditions and considerations for performing phlebotomy (bloodletting), a common practice in medieval medicine. Here's the translation:
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And if phlebotomy is performed on the third day or at the earliest pus formation, let three hours of the day have passed.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	More phlebotomy which is administered, more when it causes convenience and necessity for that, whether by night or day, at any hour and at any time.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And it is necessary that a child not be circumcised until they have reached 14 years, and a pregnant woman should not be circumcised except from the fourth month until the seventh, and elderly women should not be circumcised who have already passed 60 years.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And when someone wishes to undergo phlebotomy by any method, it is necessary to cleanse their intestines before the phlebotomy with a lion's cathartic, if there is retained faecal matter in them, so that the veins do not draw the superfluous substances into the phlebotomy of the intestines, which are purified, and so they do not harm the principal limbs.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And patients should not be phlebotomized if they are newly sacred or drunk, nor after an illness or drunkenness until these conditions have been alleviated, nor with dropsy. Moreover, phlebotomy should be feared before colic attacks and vomiting, and before the belly is full, and before excessive copulation and labor and exercise of fasting or vigil, and any cause that diminishes the body's strength, whether physical or vital.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And before the subtilation of humors, consider if the blood is thick, through foods and drinks, and through medicines if that is possible for it.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And then enter into a bath if any cause does not prohibit it, or exercise oneself through some exertion so that the blood may be refined.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And perform the bloodletting on him in the morning around the hour of terce, just as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And it is necessary that the foot of that person be protected on that day from all evil accidents, such as distress, anger, fear, and from all physical exertions, such as excessive work and labor, cares, and similar things.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And in its seat, let the causes be present that are customarily used by people with aromatics and perfumes and with balms and similar things according to the quantity of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the phlebotomist on a cushion that is higher than the cushion of he who must be bloodlet.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And then withdraw his arm, and the bloodletter should rub that area with their hand two or three times; then bind the ligature tightly with a strap and wrap it around twice.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And let the binding be moderate, for if the binding is not even, or the binding is with excess, then you prevent blood flow; or it is with softening, and then you prevent the escape of blood from the body.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And then before the binding, it is necessary that the person who is to be bled should rub their hands together until the veins are swollen and distinctly visible.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And then the bloodletter should anoint their lancet properly with a little of old oil; and then place their index finger of the left hand on that vein, leaving the spot where they want to perform the bloodletting, so that the vein protrudes slightly, and the pulsation is stopped when you find the vein that feels like a string protruding—you should perform the bloodletting there, and from those that are full of air; when you place the lancet on them, they contract—avoid such places for bloodletting, as the lancet will not penetrate the vein easily, and if it does, that indicates the vein is narrow.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And therefore, for this reason, it is necessary that the phlebotomist be firm and attentive in all these matters.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And then you remove the flebotomi (likely referring to a bloodletting instrument), but if the vein is opened in one go, it is good; and if not, you repeat this another time after leaving that spot for a little, or apply a compress over it, if the area is not inflamed.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the area is inflamed or the patient shows signs of fear, then you leave it for one or two days, and do not tighten the bandage, because it could attract more inflammation quickly, nor should they enter into a bath.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And then repeat the bloodletting if necessary.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the opening is small and blood flows subtly, and you fear that not enough blood will come out as desired, then repeat the bloodletting in the same spot slightly adjusted, and do this with a compress before the area becomes inflamed, because in many people, an inflamed area requires a smaller incision.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	But if you encounter an already inflamed area, then do not repeat the bloodletting on it, because it does not provide any benefit; and place some ointment over that area, because it alleviates the body of blood.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better in this place to use oil and other ointments.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And similarly, administer a mixture of oil in all phlebotomies with which you open the veins to prevent the flow of blood from the body, and use theriac, aloes, and sage when one of these is placed on the area, for the blood is refined and coagulated when it is thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if a large abscess is generated at the site of phlebotomy, which often happens repeatedly, especially in those who have not been bled except for that one time or only slightly from the vein, then you should apply and place on the area a sponge soaked in water and salt, slightly warmed, and keep it there for an hour, as it dissolves [the abscess].
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And it is necessary to do this near the emergence of blood from that vein with an adequate amount or from another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if some blackening or greenish tinge remains in the area for several days, do not worry about it; and if you wish, apply to that area some mixture of aloe and myrrh dissolved, or some mixture of juice from mint or calamint or something similar.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And when white spots indicate abscesses and swellings, you should perform phlebotomy (bloodletting) from the basilic vein.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And then place your hand on that area, and if you find softness there, apply your compression to it, because that prominence is harmful and bad; and then be careful not to press on that for any reason we have mentioned, because strong pressure will cause blood to flow from the artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And make a poultice with something that has astringent properties, so that the area becomes hardened, and then treat it with other therapies until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And it is necessary to withdraw blood from every person according to the amount of their strength and according to the dominant color in their blood as it appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	For if the blood is black, then you should let it flow until it becomes red; and similarly, if you find it thick, then let it flow until it becomes thin; and similarly, if it is sharp, let it flow until its sharpness is reduced.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And for those who are full and strong and have a need for blood extraction in one session, the incision of the vein should be enlarged and the bloodletting should be broad.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And in that which is free (or flowing), the opposite should be done of what was mentioned, and it must be drawn out in frequent intervals, and the treatment should be strict.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best that is administered in venesection is that the incision be transverse, not a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this method of venesection is safe from blood flow and nerve injury, and it is more praiseworthy and safer than venesection according to latitude and longitude. 
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And in cases where fainting is customary to occur before bloodletting, you must treat that condition before the bloodletting with a bit of bread infused in pomegranate juice or simple warmed honey-water; and extract from the vein of blood in three or four stages.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if it is chilled by mixture, then before bloodletting, take an infusion in myrrh syrup or in aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and the like, or in an aromatic and fragrant syrup.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if fainting occurs due to bloodletting and is caused by the loss of much blood, then one should drink water infused with meat and a subtle fragrant syrup; and use aromatics like aleppo sage, and anoint their feet with it.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And consider the other causes we have mentioned in the section on fainting due to evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And for those who wish to thin their blood and dissolve it gradually, it is suitable for someone for whom bloodletting is a significant evacuation, and the power of which is gentle, evacuating the blood little by little, according to the amount of power over several continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	And for those who wish to thin their blood and repeat the process, and whose body is strong, this should be done approximately seven or nine hours after the first bloodletting.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	More who wish to draw blood from the body should do so contrary to the part where it declines, which means they should bleed on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	More so when the blood in the body is already heated and acute, causing fever to occur, it is necessary to bleed them once and to bleed a large quantity, expanding the incision before syncope occurs, since you will have preserved all the conditions of phlebotomy; and place your hand on their pulse to control the flow of blood so that death does not occur instead of syncope, for many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant or negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And it is not necessary when you want to release the arm and evacuate blood a second time, as if the openings of the vein are already closed and it becomes difficult for the blood to flow, that you press on that area with violence and slightly extend the bent limb, for this is too harmful.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Wait with the bandage until the phlebotomy is performed secondly; or remain with the sharpness of the phlebotomy that coagulates the blood in the openings of the vein; or place over it a piece of theriaca alfaracia, or sage, and compress that area lightly until the blood has been fully expelled.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is inflamed, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the inflammation has subsided.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if the necessity to perform secondary bloodletting arises and there is no excuse not to, then you should bleed from that spot or in the other arm at another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called the "sinew of the arm" is cut open at the fossa or basilica, when those are not found or are hidden, because it is composed of those veins. 
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient introduces their hand into warm water until the vein becomes red and appears clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And then apply moderate tension on that area with a bandage; and then perform a small transverse incision, not laterally nor longitudinally.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And let the incision be wide, and perform your puncture such that you pierce slightly over the joint of the hand.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of blood is stopped, then soak the hand in warm water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your goal.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	However, if you are in the summer days, then you are excused from soaking the hand in warm water, and instead, the body should be soaked in warm water during winter.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the puncture of this vein is safer than that of all other veins, because there are no pulsating veins or nerves here.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the puncture of the palm of the right hand is associated with diseases of the liver.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of the puncture is that you should tighten the hand with a bandage or with your hand, after soaking it in warm water, until the vein is swollen and clearly visible; then puncture it transversely; and if you cut it completely, do no harm thereby.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And keep your hand steady during the phlebotomy, because otherwise the nerves of the fingers will be exposed without flesh. 
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And then wash the hand in warm water and let the blood flow into it, for if you do not wash that in warm water, the blood will clot at the opening of the vein, and it is prohibited from flowing.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when the blood is drawn according to the necessary quantity, then you place oil and salt on the vein so that it does not close immediately; and similarly, you should do this along the entire straight path of the vein.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	However, the benefit of performing bloodletting from the left hand is that it is beneficial for illnesses of the brain.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do similarly in the bloodletting of the eye as you have done in the other [procedure].
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the benefit of bloodletting from the vein sephena is for illnesses located in the lower part of the body, such as diseases of the uterus, and for the retention of menses, and for diseases of the swollen and ulcerous thighs and old sores, and similar kinds of illnesses.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of the bloodletting is such that the patient should immerse their foot in warm water and apply friction until the veins become visible; then tie a bandage around the ankle joint; and at the site where the vein becomes clearly visible, you should place your finger, from which it branches out into several small veins on the surface of the foot.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And therefore puncture the largest vein or place the patient's head towards their heel away from the swelling, for it is better and more beneficial.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you perform a venesection on the surface of the foot, then be careful of the nerves that are located above the surface of the foot, and perform your venesection in such a way that you do it across, as if you were going to cut through it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And let the venesection be silent (or: use a quiet method for the venesection
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	But if the bleeding is prohibited; then soak the foot in warm water and let the blood flow into it until it is evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the person performing the venesection makes a mistake on the first attempt, then repeat it with another puncture nearby, for the area is salty; and do not fear malevolence, but be careful of the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And similarly perform the procedure on the other foot in the same manner.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And for the sciatic vein, the location, as we have said, is below the heel behind the part of the ankle.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the treatment for the venesection of him is for hip pain when it is due to hot blood.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient enter into a bath, and they fasten and strain the thigh of the patient on the side of the ankle above four fingers with a long thin bandage, for it appears only by this means.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And so when it appears, then you perform trephination on that according to each skill that is possible for you and according to the transverse method, which is better; or incise that through an incision or excise that through an excision, because the location of it is shallow.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is in many men quite frequent; and if you find that one, and it does not appear to the sense of all, then cut off some branch of it, which appears on the back of the foot instead of the little toe and the ring finger.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And guard against the nerves, and let the blood flow in the quantity you desire.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Then release the constriction and place something over the site of the phlebotomy, compressing the area, because it heals quickly.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Regarding ventilation and the qualities of using those methods.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Blisters can be made from horns, or from resin, or from veal.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And ventilation is done in two ways: one of them is with scarification and blood extraction, and the other is ventilation without scarification.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this ventilation that is without scarification is done in two ways, for it can be done with fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And for the blisters that are administered with scarification and blood extraction, there are fourteen sites on the body. Among these, one location where blisters are placed is alnocrati, which is the back part of the head; another site is on both sides of the neck; blisters under the jaw below the mandible, just below the mouth; blisters on both armpits; blisters on alohoster, which is at the end of the spine; blisters on both flanks, and these are from both arms; blisters on both temples; and blisters on both thighs.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And for bleeding, you do not extract blood from the small veins scattered throughout the flesh, and by this you do not diminish their strength as is often the case with phlebotomy; nor should bleeding be done with fire or without fire in any disease caused by accumulation until the whole body has been evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	And if the necessity for bleeding is provoked by illness or continuously, administer it at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, in the middle of the month, and at any time.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause is that among men, there are those in whom blood multiplies to the point where it needs to be extracted through bleeding; they experience heaviness and swelling in their head. Among them are those who suffer from accumulation and heat in their face, head, and neck. There are also those who feel sharp pain in their face and forehead, along with darkness and dullness in their eyes. Some of these individuals sweat at the site of the bleeding. Others have an increase in phlegm. Some experience a taste of blood in their mouth or have a swollen tongue that spits out blood. There are also those who sleep excessively, and others who see blood in their dreams, along with heat, chills, plagues, and other similar causes.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore when dealing with any of those causes, and specifically if it is in the third month or a bit later, then I command that ventilation be performed more than two or three hours after passing.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And the treatment for dizziness in the neck is that when you apply pressure to the head and cause it to sink into the pillows; but it should be done close to a complete evacuation of the whole body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this cupping is in the location of the cephalic vein incision.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not good that he uses it if he has a cold constitution, or if there is catarrh in him, for it brings great harm to him.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And for this reason, it is not suitable for the elderly to use it, and those whose heads are affected by cold illnesses.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	However, for those on whom this is continuously applied, forgetfulness may occur; therefore, you must command the cupper to slightly pause his hand between the applications of the cupping, to prevent the generation of forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	However, cupping with alcohol is used instead of bloodletting from the saphenous vein and basilic vein; therefore, it is applied for asthma, constriction of the airways, ruptures in the airway, cough, and congestion.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And the alcohol cupping should be slightly paused, for if it is left on, it generates weakness in the body and stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And cupping with alhagdahan is applied for accidental pains in the head, ophthalmia, migraine, suffocation, and pain in the roots of the teeth; and it is used instead of bloodletting from the basilic vein.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And you must command the barber not to press his hand too hard during scarification so as not to pierce the artery and cause blood flow.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And when you move the chin towards the alcohol in the mouth, it causes corruption of the gums, and resembles the diseases that are in the mouth, which stand in place of a tracheotomy for alien bodies located within the two lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	And the swelling that is caused by the two spatulas should be attributed to cataplasma, which is made by the application of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the windiness of both parts within the flanks contributes to the benefit of phlebotomy from three veins, that is, the basilic, saphenous, and cephalic, because those attract blood from all those smaller veins that are in the flesh, and those smaller veins from the other larger veins until the attraction reaches the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the surgeon not to proceed too much in scarification, for the area is bare of flesh, and leave its nerves and arteries intact. 
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is a cupping where it is applied over the thighs and extends to the hemorrhoids of the anus and to the pus-filled ulcers.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And you must command the bloodletter to make a large leeching, and that it be of ash [likely meaning 'of sufficient number'], for the area requires strong drying; thus apply powerful subtle leeches and let it be scarified with scarification.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	Here is the translation line by line based on the characteristics of the language provided:
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, fever weakens the entire body and causes fainting spells in many people.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And for the treatment with cupping, it is commonly applied to the cupping points on two sides of the back.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the cupping position is such that you place the cup at the beginning and suction gently for a short time, and do not prolong the placement of the cups; rather, place them lightly, remove them gently, so that the humors come to the surface gradually.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not stop repeating this process and continue until you see the area become reddened and swollen, and the coagulation of blood appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then you should scratch the area and gradually repeat the suction process, and also consider the condition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	For that person who has delicate flesh and sparse pores, you should scratch them once and not more, so that the area does not become ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And instruct the cupper to increase the scratching slightly and to apply the suction gently.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if there is thickness in the blood, then it must be that you scrape twice, for in the first scraping the path of subtle extraction to the blood and its moisture is opened.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	But in the second part of the examination obtained from the extraction of thick blood. 
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the blood is too thick, then a third scarification should be performed so that it can achieve the desired effect. 
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And finally, when we want to extract blood slowly or in small amounts, a scarification is enough for us.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we use extensive scarification; and if we know that the blood is thick, then we must scarify using deep scarification.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term "scarification" refers solely to the depth of the incision.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the vein is thick, hard, dark, and its pores are narrow, it is necessary that the areas for cupping be anointed with more soothing, opening, and resolving oils; if it is summer, such as aloes oil or violet oil, or double almond oil, or coltsfoot oil; and if it is winter, then use narcissus oil or lily oil or chamomile oil or blood oil, and similar ones.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the excess is thick and cold, then the oil should be Amarant oil, or Balsamita oil, or Aloes oil, or Anise oil, and similar ones.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	And if the bloodletting site has wide pores of tender flesh, then it must be prohibited from using oil, and the areas around the bloodletting spots should be washed with warm water or cold water, or water from coals, or water from dew, or similar substances.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And for the one whose blood is of considerable moisture, wash their swellings with sour wine, or with water of myrtle and sumac and similar things.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And for those in whom the excesses are thick, wash their bloodletting spots with old wine, or with water of hyssop, which is marjoram, or from decoction of dill, or chamomile, and similar things.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And it must be protected from bath before ventilation; however, it should be administered close to the time of bathing for about an hour or two, and it must sleep near the ventilation.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What must be done is that bloodletting should be regulated before performing ventosation.
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	Consider at the beginning: when the patient or one who is to be bled is choleric and there is sharp blood and inflammation, then it is necessary to take cooling measures, such as sour pomegranates, bitter endive, vinegar, lettuce, dried hemp, julep, and similar things.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And restrict their foods as much as possible, and serve them bird meats, and season their dishes with herbs, and similarly.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And for one whose condition is inflammatory, it is necessary that they drink almond syrup or bittersweet aniseed syrup made from seeds, sumac, and sweet-smelling wine between old and new; and it should be recommended to them to use moderation in drinking and eating, and to avoid foods like pork, hemp, pheasants, small birds, and pigeons.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And it is necessary that on the day of bloodletting and venesection, drinking should be more than eating.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And it is necessary to give certain people in specific hours theriaca alpharac, or musk medicine, such as mastic, or alchemilla before bloodletting or venesection or afterwards, so that the main limbs may be comforted and the blood made finer; and they should not take those that are heated.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	But the bloodlettings that are performed by incision should be applied to the liver area, and on the spleen and gout-affected areas, and around the navel, at the sites of the joints, and on the spine, because these parts cannot withstand incisions on them.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not desired by those for anything but the attraction of blood from a member, just as placing a cupping glass on the breast in the illness of nasal bleeding; and they use that to dissolve fresh and viscous air trapped within the member, just as when placed on the abdomen and navel; because that rarefies the member, warms it, and removes the pain when you resolve the air.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is already placed on the lungs when you encounter their congestion or phlegm, for by the power of strong attraction it removes congestion and eliminates the phlegm from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And similarly, it acts when placed on the liver and spleen to expel air trapped within those organs.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these cupping glasses are applied only with suction; and sometimes they are applied with heat.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And sometimes they are applied filled with tepid water in the diseases of the spleen.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And this is done so that the cupping glass may be filled and become larger, whether it is hot water alone or water in which suitable herbs for this purpose have been boiled.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of cupping administered with fire: the diameter of the opening should be two fingers wide, according to how we have formed it; and the quantity of air inside should be half a palm; and it should be placed on his side, in the area that is within the circuit, halfway across it, where the puncture should be small enough for a needle to enter.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	It should be made of smooth or citrus wood, with thick edges, round, equal, and smooth so that it does not move the limb from its position on it. 
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And in the middle of the transverse bar of iron or wood, a candle is placed with fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this cupping glass is larger than the one we have recommended; and it should be smaller than that according to the illness and the age of the person using it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the cupping glasses for children and those who are weakened are different from the cupping glasses for young adults and those with larger bodies.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	The quality of applying this cupping glass with fire on the limb is to extend a strip with fire from decent wood in front of a small candle flame, and place that in the middle of the transverse rod at the center of the cupping glass, so that the fire can be lit around it without burning the patient's body.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	Then it should be placed on the patient's limb, with the finger over the spot we have mentioned, until such time as when we have the cupping glasses and do not want to keep the finger in place for the vapor to rise over that spot, then the cupping glass will soon come off.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	Then ignite the strip according to its manner, and repeat that if you need to do so.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	Here is the translation line by line based on the provided instructions:
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is its form: And this cupping device, the larger it is, the better, because it can receive a large quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Capitol .xcvii.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Bloodletting is not administered in many members but only in those members where the placement of cupping glasses is not possible due to their small size, such as the foot and gums and similar areas; or in parts devoid of flesh, such as the finger and nose and similar areas.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those leeches that you have found in the stagnant waters of putrid mud.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	Then they should be left day and night in stagnant water until they become hungry, and that no residue remains in their bellies; then the body should be purged at the beginning with bloodletting and cupping; then rub the patient’s limb until it becomes red; then place them on [the affected area].
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are full and fall off.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to draw out the fluid from the area using a cupping glass, it is more beneficial for healing.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, then wash the area with vinegar and then with clean water; and it should be rubbed and squeezed.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the flow of blood extends near the placement of the leeches, and it is dripping there, then you dip a cloth in cold water, and place that over until the dripping has stopped.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the blood is multiplied, then sprinkle powdered vitriol or ashes and things similar to styptic causes, until the bleeding stops; or place the insides of boiled bean pods over the area, leaving them there until the beans adhere to the spot, and thus the bleeding will stop.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And it is necessary, if required, to perform repeated bloodlettings, changing them when possible.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if bloodlettings are prohibited due to suspension, then rub the area with fresh blood or insert a needle into the spots until blood comes out; and then apply them, for those who feel any blood will be alleviated immediately.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to discharge, sprinkle a little powdered alum or salt or ash over them, and they will discharge immediately.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begins the section of the third part: on restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine; it is about the restoration of fractures and dislocations in the bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	O, son, know that those who boast about this chapter are foolish doctors and common ones, and those who never looked into the books of the Ancients nor read a letter from them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason, it is done that this manner of the wise in our land is kept secret; and I have not forgotten this at any time; nor have I applied what follows without a lengthy reading of the books of the Ancients and study on understanding those, from which I extracted the knowledge of them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And then direct yourself to experiment and study throughout the length of your life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described in this chapter all that my knowledge contains and on which my experience has passed; since I have summarized this for you others and freed it from elongation; and I have summarized this at the end of the summary; and shown this at the end of the declaration; and formed various forms of the treatments that are administered there, as is done by addition to the declaration, just as I have done in the two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summary and collections concerning bone fractures, from which a preliminary note is necessary before we begin the recollection of fractured members and the various aspects of each one.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Therefore, in the prelude of this chapter, we should speak of the summaries of the discourse; and the chapters to which the understanding must be directed at the beginning, forcing the artisans to stand on the truth of those things; that is for you and those who are quick to know or learn this noble art other than yourselves.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore it is said that when you encounter a fracture or dislocation or twist or sprain, then at the beginning you must treat with bloodletting or splinting that area, or both together, unless some cause prohibits it, such as weakness of strength, or if you are treating a child, or an elderly person in frailty, or if it is during intense heat, or severe cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	Then be content with food such as fresh herbs and the meat of birds and crabs; and prohibit fatty meats and overfilling oneself with foods and any food that fills the veins with blood, except when you are sure of a safe abscess cautery, and if you do not fear an effusion of matter into the limb.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to their original regimen with which they are accustomed.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And therefore as the broken bone begins to heal, then the patient must be fed nutritious foods that are rich and heavy with viscosity, such as foods made from cooked wheat with water, rice, beans, fish, cow's stomachs, eggs, fresh cheese, thick wine, and similar items. With this regimen, fracture healing coagulates more easily and better.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And you should know that bones that are fractured in young men and the elderly cannot be naturally continued and consolidated due to the dryness of their limbs.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are solidified and continued according to their nature at all times by the drying of those members, and thus continue and strengthen those that belong to them at the end of their softness, just as the bones of young children do.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	However, nature adjusts and you should bind over the fractured bone from all sides with something similar to glue in which there is thickness that adheres and strengthens what is between them as they are conglutinated and tied together, until strength and firmness come, just as at the beginning when fire starts, until nothing stops it from its work.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason, it is necessary to restrict the patient's food, foods which are heavy and viscous and coarse, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	And describe the diversity of fractures according to the diversity of the limb.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And know that the types of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the limbs, for a fracture of the bone in the head is different from a fracture of the thigh bone; and a fracture of the foot bone is different from a fracture of the back bone; and similarly all other limbs are diverse among them.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I will include a recollection of every type of fracture, explained in its own separate chapter distinct from the other.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Note the diversity of fractures within itself.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the types of bone fractures are diversified within themselves; for there is an arched fracture that occurs in the ribs; and sometimes a fracture follows the length of the bone: and these are the fractures of the spine, ribs, and procedural and non-procedural additions, just as it is done with a pen when it is prepared to write, and there is a fracture with a plate and disruption at the head, and there is a small fissure fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And every type has its own method or treatment for restoration, which will be recalled separately in their respective sections.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Mark the sign of a bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And by this is known a bone fracture: it is the twisting of it, and that prominence and appreciation of it through sensation, and so of it when you compress it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore when there is no visible deformity in the location and you do not feel any abnormal movement when touching the bone with agitation and the patient does not find great pain, then it is not a fracture.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It is possible that there may be a slight deformity or small fissure, in which case you do not need to massage it with your hand and compression all over; instead, apply one of the medicines that recall relief at that moment suitable for the area; then wrap it tightly with a subtle bandage.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And know that when the area is bent but not split into two or any other way that does not affect its stability, and the entire part of its connection remains intact, then you must begin at once to correct it by applying a poultice.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if a poultice is to be applied, then leave it on for several days until the swelling subsides; and afterward, treat it in whatever way you can with轻柔与巧思。(注意：最后部分似乎在翻译过程中出现了语言的混用，正确翻译应保持一致性。以下为修正版本)
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And know that the restoration and healing of soft tissues is quicker than that of bone where the injury has occurred.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	Then strengthen that second part so that the memory of it returns.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	And if the injury is in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken limb from both ends, whether it is an arm or a leg; or with your hand if the limb is small; or with two ropes or one rope and your hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And position the limb in such a way that you place it according to its natural shape, while the broken parts of the limb are being stretched, so that you can skillfully return those adducted parts to their proper places using any method you can.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And be careful according to your strength that you do not cause pain or injury to the patient through your operation; and skillfully apply your best effort to join one bone with another in their proper alignment.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And it is necessary that at that moment you skillfully touch and adjust that area with your hand, and if there is any other cause of discrepancy, correct it and align it according to the extent of your ability.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And there is a strong extension and compression, just as some foolish doctors do at various times cause the abscess to occur through their operation, or cause contraction in the limb just as we have seen this happen through their operations on many occasions.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And then attach, and equalize and conduct a proper operation and constriction of that limb, and rest and tranquility; advise the patient about this and make them abstain from any distress to that limb during their waking hours and sleep, and observe its movement and agitation, and prevent all its movements with all its strength; and wait until the position of the limb is such a position in which pain is assured, which happens when it is in the disposition of the painful or injured position; then you must change it to another position where no pain is felt; and take care that the position of the limb is straight and equal so that when restored, no deformity occurs to the limb.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the constriction of the tranquil limb is what I recommend; so that you know that broken limbs vary in their smallness and greatness and in the form of those. 
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And of those that are small like the arm and the toe and the finger and similar to these, it is necessary that the wrapping be of very fine cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	And for those that are large like the thigh or the buttock, it is necessary to wrap them tightly and firmly, because the lateral binding connects the large and strong member from all sides with equal tightness, in such a way that no imperfection enters into it.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And then begin, for your evacuation of the fracture, to apply an appropriate bandage on that area where the fracture is, with three or four layers according to what the limb requires; and hold your hand slightly over the bandage.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then come to the highest part of the fracture area, and hold more firmly so that your binding does not loosen with which you have held the area of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And then lengthen the area of the fracture slightly with bandaging, and gradually loosen the binding little by little until you have straightened a large part of the area.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And then take another bandage and wrap it again over the broken area with bandaging, and come to the lower part of the fracture with the bandages; and let your operation be in the binding of the wrapping and in loosening it as we have said for the first wrapping above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then place between the layers of linen or cloth something that adjusts to the curvature of the fracture, if there is any curvature in it; and if not, do not place anything in it for any reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then place another bandage over it, and then apply these well-made plasters immediately, if there is no inflammation or abscess in the area, and then place what is needed to treat the abscess on it and reduce the swelling; and leave this for several days; and then bind the plasters firmly onto it.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And let the plasters be made of half a cane's width, carefully shaped; or they may be made of pine wood; or of palm ribs; and the width of each plaster should follow this form and this figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, the plaster that is placed over the fracture should be a bit thicker and wider than the other plasters, and the length of the plaster according to what suits the size of the limb; then bind the plasters with another bandage according to your initial binding technique; then cover it with pitch as we have said about binding, which means that your binding should be tighter at the site of the fracture, and as you move further from the fracture, the tightness decreases.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And it is necessary that the threads be medium in thickness and fineness, and they should be made of linen; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the operations of some false practitionners using their threads like ropes from twisted fibers, this is a great error, for it causes the binding to be uneven.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And fine filaments are not suitable, because you will not be able to achieve what you want with those due to constriction, and it is necessary that there be at least a finger's width between each filament.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is bothered by the extremities of the stars near the constriction in those areas, then place there felt or carded wool so that it does not cause injury to them.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	And here is the translation line by line:
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And know that not every broken limb is set straight with splints on the first day; this is because when the limb is large, it does not need to be placed under splints right away but rather after about five days or seven days or more, according to your certainty of the occurrence of an abscess formation.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the method of plasters with which the Ancients treated fractures, dislocations, and twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Method of a plaster for the restoration of fractures, suitable for various complications and especially for women and children, as it does not produce heat or irritation: take flour powder, which is the marrow of the flour that hangs from the motion of the millstone on the walls of the mill.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And prepare it thus: sieve it with egg white, and make the mixture neither too thick nor too thin; then use it accordingly.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method of plaster for treating fractures, dislocations, and twists: take aniseed, ladanum, acacia, fennel, and musk, which is the resin of wild millet, all one drachm each; myrrh and aloes each half a drachm; saffron two drachms. All should be crushed, sieved, and mixed with either anise water or egg white if the patient’s condition is inflamed; then apply this plaster, as it has a good composition that easily restores broken bones and provides relief to many people.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another method for making a poultice that you apply to fractures and sprains: take myrrh and add white marshmallow root, one dram each; of frankincense and aloe, half a dram each; of acacia, three-quarters of a dram; of Armenian bole, two drams.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All are ground in a mortar with fine grinding, and they are sieved, and they are compounded with water or with egg white and is administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Method for treating joints and bones separated from their places, where accidents cause pain in those areas and fractures: take clean wool and immerse it in sweet wine and cooked oil, then place it on the affected area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	But in this plaster there is no virtue of restoration, it burns and expels pain properly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method of plaster that restores broken bones: take leaves of wild fig and leaves of wild poppy; grind them all and make a plaster from them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Method of a soothing plaster administered for the restoration of bone fractures and when you want to resolve the remaining inflammation: take roots of elder, chamomile, and flowers of violets, flour of ashes, all in equal parts; grind them all and mix them with wine, if the limb is not heated.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	But if it is heated, then soothe it with coriander water or with water and oil mixed together.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method of a stronger plaster for resolving a hard inflammation and restoring the limb: take roots of elder and its seeds, pomegranate rind, sweet clover, marjoram, violet flowers, chamomile flowers, all in equal parts; grind them all and mix them with sage water or sweet water or wine, according to the nature of the limb and the condition of the color of it.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence, line by line:
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	Here is the translation line by line:
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Method of plaster that comforts injury and pain: take barley, sesame, shaved human hair or bird's down, and elder, and salt, in equal parts; they should be ground and sifted and mixed together, and a plaster should be made.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	Here is the translation of the given sentence line by line:
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if you encounter a place with severe pain or pressure or inflammation, then you should treat or relieve that area immediately, and remove the poultice from it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take linen cloth and sea sponge, wet it, and submerge it in warm water, and use that to wash the area until the pressure ceases and the pain is alleviated; then let the limb rest for an hour; then place over it fresh wool soaked in sweet wine and oil or ointment, and leave it there for a night until you are sure of a safe abscess, and that the inflammation of the limb has subsided, and that the pain from it is remedied.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then apply that subtle binding and small poultice without tightening it as in your first constriction, and use it gently until it is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if you find that the abscess, the hardness, the pain, the inflammation, and all the symptoms are completely remedied, and you no longer need a poultice or binding, then you should repeat the process as you did at the beginning in the same manner.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if no cause from those we have mentioned affects the limb, then do not loosen it until three or four or five or seven days; and sometimes all of this is left for twenty days according to how you see the loosening of the limb, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and approaches the coagulation of the flesh over that area.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And now adjust more in the binding than in your initial binding entirely, and adjust according to the swelling of the patient's food, as it is preceded by the recollection of it. 
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	More if you see the place of the fracture already dry and exhausted more than it should be, then know that nutrition is prohibited from reaching there; therefore, moisten that area with lukewarm water constantly as you clean it; do this for all three days; and lighten the tightness a little, and through this operation bring nutrition to the limb, and it heals lightly.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	However, what those foolish restorers of a fractured limb do otherwise when it is not restored properly at the beginning, and is restored with tortuosity according to their operation, is an error, causing great fear; if this were corrected, the Ancients enlarged upon it in their books and acted accordingly.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen any of them do this, which is why it is more reasonable that this should not be done.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter second: On fractures when they occur in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The types of fractures are many, and their forms are diverse, and the causes are distinct. For some fractures are caused by the blow of an axe, and the blow pushes all the bone inside the skull, which is left without the bone, just as this happens to a log; therefore, this type is named ascial. Or the axe incises part of the bone and cuts into the flesh but does not penetrate through to the back of it; and this species of fracture is called levatio absoluta.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the harm of these two fractures is either great or slight, and [it refers to] a fracture that is comminuted or impacted; and the cause of it is a blow with a weapon or falling on stone, and such are their likenesses.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture either penetrates close to the periosteum which is beneath the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone, and the severity of these two types of fractures can be great or slight.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And for a fracture that occurs in the bone, in the fine hair-like parts, and because of this is named this type of fracture capillary.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And it is a fracture that is caused either by a fall or the impact of a stone and similar objects, which causes some slivers of bone to enter into the interior parts, and it occurs in the area of concavity just as when you strike the edges of clay pots where their surface breaks inward upon impact.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And this is particularly done in bodies with moist bones, such as children's heads.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And thus to all these kinds of fractures, they apply weights like separate stars.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And I will come back to all of this in its proper place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And we recognize all these types of fractures by detection on them and by probing their edges and the corruption of flesh that is over them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And the capillary type is known by what is discovered on the bone, which is cleaned and covered with a cloth, for the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	However, in the treatment of fractures, consider at the beginning the symptoms of the patient, and when you see by the symptoms that they indicate manifestly through signs of fear, such as vomiting due to anger, and stretching, and loss of understanding, and loss of voice, and fainting, and acute fever, and discharge from the bowels and burning of them, and similarities in their symptoms in the most severe conditions, then it is understood that it will not be healed.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you see unusual symptoms, you should hope for recovery, and then you begin the treatment of it.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The reason is that if the injured person comes to you at the beginning when they are injured and this happens in the winter days, then you must study the condition of the bone before the fourteenth day according to all conditions.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is during the days of summer, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the seventh day, fearing that what remains next to the bone might be corrupted by pus, and that accidents we have recounted may occur.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the bone covering the brain and is in small broken and rough pieces, then you must incise the comminuted and roughened break, as I will recommend to you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And it is that you shave the head of the afflicted patient, and expose the bone according to your custom and method as much as possible according to the shape of the affliction, and that it be light on the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if you happen to encounter the detection of bone, blood flow, or an inflamed abscess, then you must act accordingly, which is to fill the area with cloths soaked in wine and oiled rags, and let the wound rest until the inflammation subsides and ensure there is no further bleeding; then proceed with the circling of the bone and its removal.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this should be done according to one of two methods of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And one method is that you incise the bone with a straight cutting instrument, and this is its form: Then administer another incising tool like this, a bit further to the side than the previous one; and this is its form:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then administer more of the incision to the side than the second [part].
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And it is necessary that you have a variety of cutting instruments, some broader than others; and some are shorter than the others and are sharp at the ends, and they should be made of Indian iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them with ease in percussion over the incisions so that the head does not adhere and allows that area to be free.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and hard, then you must perforate around it before administering the incisors with the tools, which are called non-deepening tools.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are not named thus unless those do not stop the term of the bone of the testicle to that which is near it, so that on the tip there is a round extremity or margin above which is left the sharp end resembling a small margin or circle, which you must prevent from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take from these needles a great number of which each must be suited to the sharpness for each bone, among them should be present in all kinds of brain tests the end of which should be sharp, the quantity in length and brevity should be according to the sharpness needed for this test.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the form of three types of treatments: The quality of piercing around the broken bone is that you place the treatment on the bone and rotate it with your hands until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then change the treatment to another location, placing it so that all throughout equals the thickness of a nail or about that.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then cut with an incisor between each fragment of the bone, and make that pus as fine as you can on top of it until it rises lightly, just as we have said, before you remove the bone, whether by hand or with some other tool which you will have prepared for this purpose, such as tweezers and fine forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And you must be very careful that the incisor does not touch any part of the spine.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And thus, once you have circumscribed the perforated bone, which will be separated from the spine if it is connected to it, and you have extracted it, you must rasp and smooth it on its roughness with another tool similar to an incisor, but it should be thinner and finer than other incisors.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if any small and stubborn fragments of the bone remain, then remove them easily with the appropriate tools you have; then treat the wound with lint and ointments as we have mentioned.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And another method of operation is gentle and far from fear, which is called Gaulia and uses great light; this is what it entails: at the beginning, you must start by exposing the part of the bone where the fracture is most violent and evident. Then, once you have exposed that part and placed the tip of this smooth and gentle incisor, whose form is as follows:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And it is that the lenticular fracture is lion-shaped and does not cut through any cause, and the sharp fracture splits it into two parts along its length, just as often; so the lenticular fracture should be aligned with the spine with the sharp edge facing towards the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then strike on the incision of a part with a small hammer between so that you cut through the entire bone with ease as it turns, and be sure about the periosteum that no accident happens to it in any way, and even if the medic was the most foolish of all people and the least knowledgeable among them; certainly, and even if he were asleep. 
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	When any attached cause remains in the bone of the panniculus at certain places of the bone, cut that part with the pointed end of a lens-shaped incisor and remove it easily, for it is removed without harm and without fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the subcutaneous tissue, and what is severed or remains of the bone is its surface, and roughness and subtle splinters remain in it, then you must scrape away that roughness and eradicate those splinters with fine razors which you have prepared in various quantities so that you can apply them in all the most suitable places for their use and the most precise manner according to how you need to conduct your operation on that broken bone and its shape.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And you must apply with your reason at the beginning the least sharp of those razors, and then use progressively the finer ones, and do not cease doing this continuously until you reach administering the sharpest and the finest of all of them.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	And in each of the other small capillary and subtle fractures, you must administer care according to what you need for the correction of it.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is important to note that not everyone who has studied in that field is equally skilled or reliable.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And we have demonstrated this on large fractures as well.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the panniculus is cut when you remove the bone, then you must take cloth according to the size of the wound, and submerge that in oiled rose oil, and place that over the opening of the wound; then take another piece of cloth folded or tripled and submerge it in wine and oiled rose oil and place that over the first cloth and do this as lightly as you can so that you do not aggravate the condition; then apply a linen bandage on top, and do not tighten it more than necessary according to the size of the wound only.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And leave it with this treatment for one or two days until you are sure of an abscess; then remove the dressing and apply medicines that have excessive drying properties, such as linseed poultices and flour of mustard, and powders of ashes and of aristolochia, and similar things.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And you should make these medicines into a powder that is sprinkled over the wound when they are dry; generally, apply any medicine whose property is to clean without irritating.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And beware according to your skill that the wound in your treatment is clean; and do not let there be any deafness of ointment or other impurities; nor allow virulence to accumulate in it; for when it is applied over the panniculus of the brain, it corrupts that and ruins it, leading you to cause a malicious malignancy in the patient.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And you strike at the skull's socket, as its bone is damaged and especially when the care of it is neglected, and there is blackening on its surface; therefore consider now if such accidents happen to the patient that we have mentioned, know that it is harmful in every respect.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if no blackening occurs except from the medicine that is placed on it, and it is due to that medicine causing such blackening, then you must take one part of honey and three parts of rubbed oil, and with those mix a cloth, and then place that over the head; and then treat it with healing spices until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III. 
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	For the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that the nose is not broken into more than two main parts, or one of those might be slightly bent, because there are two bones in it, and the part between them is cartilaginous, which does not break; therefore, you only encounter friction, twisting, and curvature.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	If one of the two parts of the nose is broken, then you must insert your little finger into the patient's nose and align that fracture inside with your index finger, while using your thumb outside to guide it, until the nose returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And this should be done gently by you, and be careful not to cause additional pain to the patient through your procedure.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose where your finger cannot reach, then it should be aligned using the tip of a probe that has a small thickness.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in both parts, then you should treat it in the same manner.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And attend to the restoration of him on the first day of the fracture, if possible; and if not, then around the seventh or tenth day you should rest from the inflammation cauterization.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And then insert into the end of the nose a wad of linen cloth, if the fracture is in one piece, or put two splints, if the fracture is in two pieces, and let the splint be thick enough to fill the passage of the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And these are some of the ancient restorers' claims that bandages should be wrapped around the wound, and changed throughout the day, although I do not agree; rather, it is necessary that the joint be wrapped in egg white mixed with powder of mill; and then leave until the bone is set and the cartilage has hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And sometimes, instead of a bandage, cotton wool wrapped in linen cloth is inserted into the nose; and it is for when the nasal fracture is severe but does not obstruct breathing.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you wish, do that, and if you wish, use bandages.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if swelling occurs again, apply a poultice to the nose with wax or fat infused in sweet wine and rose oil, or with diachylon (a type of plaster).
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	But if swelling does not occur, then you must plaster the area externally with flour of sponge and powder of crushed eggs mixed with egg white; and then place a linen cloth over it, and do not touch the nose for any reason.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	If the bones of the nose are fractured or comminuted, then you must incise over them and extract them with instruments appropriate for that purpose; then close the incision and treat it with remedies that heal and consolidate, and with plasters suitable for that purpose.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if there is an ulcer inside the nose, then you must treat it with cauterization and administer lead tubes until it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter IV.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the restoration of the jaw when it is fractured.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not associated with an ulcer, observe whether the fracture is only on the outer side and has not been split into two pieces but is bent towards the inside; in this case, the treatment is simple.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	Therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, you should insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth; and similarly, if the fracture is on the left jaw, then insert the right index finger; and push the displaced part of the fracture inward with ease towards the outer parts, using your other hand on the outer part of the bone; in this way, you properly align it.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, then it is necessary to administer extension from both sides according to straightness until it is possible to align it.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if you encounter the displacement of teeth due to disruption, then strengthen those that you hope will remain with a gold or silver wire or cord; and then place wax over the broken jaw, and then place a doubled cloth over it, and place a well-made linen bandage or a piece of leather equal in length to the jaw over the cloth; and then bind it according to how you have prepared the binding for it and apply it appropriately until it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to use rest and tranquility, and give them food that is easy to swallow.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you suspect that the shape has been altered in any way, then on the third day, be cautious and loosen it; then correct what is already altered and apply a plaster made with powdered mullein, egg white, or celery seed flour, after you have removed the wax from it, and place wool over the plaster.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then when the plaster is attached and adjusted to it, and the position of the bone is not altered, leave it like that, do not loosen it until it is healed and the fracture has strengthened; because often this fracture takes about three weeks to tighten.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if an abscess occurs again, then administer what we have said multiple times in the sedation of it until it is healed, and let that abscess be drained.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is accompanied by a wound, then consider whether it is a fragment of the bone that is separated or splinters; then you should carefully remove those splinters using what is appropriate for removing such debris from the wound.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the opening of the wound is narrow, then you should enlarge it with trephination according to the extent of your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And then when you have removed those splinters, and no pus is draining from them, sew up the wound if it is large; and if not, apply one of the plasters suitable for this purpose to close it, until it is healed.
Capitol .v.	Capitol .v.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	For the restoration of the collarbone when it is broken.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	When the collarbone is fractured in front of the muscle, that fracture can occur in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	For it is either broken, separated, or separated into two parts without touching the joint; and its restoration is easy. Or it is such that it affects the joint, making its restoration difficult. Or it is such that the fracture is accompanied by a plaque.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And in the case where the fracture is accompanied by a plaque, you should have two assistants present, so that one holds the support and follows the broken collarbone, and the other extends the neck to that part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	Then align the fracture with your hands so that it takes the proper shape, and ensure there are no small protrusions or concavities in it.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if more extension is needed, then you must place a small pillow under the patient's neck made of cloth or wool, and its size should be according to your need; extend and lift the collarbone and compress the pillow with your hand until you align the fracture as required.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot pull the tip of the furcula to the external parts because it has reached the peritoneum, then the patient must be made to lie on their back, and a cushion of moderate size should be placed over the muscle.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the minister presses the muscle of the patient in the areas between which the clavicle bone is elevated, which is above it, and then you correct the fracture and align it with the mentioned ties.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	And if you feel abscesses in the armpit and they are painful, then you must cut into that area and remove those abscesses with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is retained in the bone, then you should perform an incision on it using one of the incisors which you have prepared for this purpose, since you had already placed the forceps under it; and this instrument is made of wood or iron, and here is its form:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it is similar to a spoon, of which this is the concavity; and its width should be according to what you need from it, according to the size or smallness of the bone.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	And let the length of it be as much as is possible for you during the operation; it should have two ends just like you see, and one end should be wide and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the wound that you have incised when you extracted the splinter from the bone is wide, and it is secure from pus formation, then you should align the two edges of the wound with sutures.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is small, or you fear pus formation, then you should fill the wound with bandages and poultices according to the extent of the wound's裂口。 
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if an abscess happens to form, then soak a cloth in sweet wine and rose oil and vinegar, and place it over that area.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	And when the bone is swollen and its section is constricted, apply a plaster made of mill flour with egg white, place it over the broken area, and then place a splint under it to ensure stability. If needed, take a bandage that the Saracens use, which is quite long and about one palm wide; then place two pillows on top of the break and the plaster. Next, take a thin wooden strip whose width is three fingers and length similar to that; wrap it in cloth, and then wrap this cloth with the strip over the fracture site. Apply bandages as described above, wrapping them around the neck of the bone and under it, and place it under the patient's broken area. Reduce all parts together, and when you apply constriction to the break, do so gently without being concealed from your view.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And all this is to ensure that the splint above the broken bone is not loose; and for this reason, you must see the patient every day, so that when the bandage becomes soft or you notice the splint is already loose, then you correct this and strengthen the binding.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And then place the patient's shoulder on their pillow, and put a small cushion under their neck so that during the night their head is slightly elevated; in this way, the support from that side is raised, thus elevating the clavicle fracture along with the muscle; or tie their arm to their neck.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not loosen the bandage unless you encounter swelling or an abscess in the area within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And then renew the plaster if you have seen its surface like this, and apply it to the constriction, restore it, and leave it until the clavicle fracture is restored and coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and healed according to the month in twenty-eight days, and sometimes in some men, it happens in less time than that.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter .6.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	On the restoration of a shoulder fracture.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The shoulder blade is fractured on the outer side of it, and not through it but only at the edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And therefore when the place is broken — and it is broken in the middle part of it — and it is not known except by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture force it into position and reduce it according to its natural shape in every way that you can possibly manage with ingenuity.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And then apply powder of ground alum and egg white to the area, and stop it with lion's wool; then place a layer of doubled cloth over it; then apply thin slices of table salt according to the quantity of the entire or almost all of the spatula over it.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	But if the salt leaves a concavity in any part of the spatula, then fill that concavity with lion's wool, and then raise the salt to an even level.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then strengthen it with a long bandage wrapped properly and secured so that the salt does not move from its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And examine the bandage every day; whenever it becomes loose, bind it again and tighten it, and reposition the salt if it has moved from its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And lay the patient on his side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the spatula is restored in twenty days or in twenty-five.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And therefore when this number is completed, then you dissolve the binding, and you must be certain which of those are bones whose beginning is not feared nor their dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed from the site of the broken bone and place the chain there, then you cut into it, remove it, and do as we have said in the fracture of the clavicle: cauterize if an abscess forms here.
Capitol .vii.	Capitol .vii.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	For the restoration of the fracture of the foot.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot is sometimes broken in the middle and it heals slowly; however, the ends move and become misaligned and crushed.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And among the consequences when the middle of it is broken, it inclines inward and causes great pain, difficulty in movement, coughing, severe fever, and vomiting blood; and it is evident in the cavity where the bone is fractured and not hidden to the senses.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of it is that the patient should be laid on their back, and a cushion should be placed between their shoulders; then press on the muscles and align the sides with your hands, being very precise in the operation and adjustment in every way possible to ensure that the bone returns to its proper shape.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And then place an ointment and tow on it, cover that with a thin linen or canvas or something similar in lightness, as you wrap it in cloth; then carefully bind that over the fractured bone so that it is not tight; and go around binding according to the roundness of the back at times, tightening it appropriately; then keep an eye on the bandage all the time, and when it becomes loose, tighten it.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if necessity prompts the removal of that due to corrosion or pricking, or pain, or an abscess that might occur in the area, then you cut and remove that and eliminate the plaster and correct what happened by this means through the method of healing him; and then return the plaster, if it needs to be done again; and adjust for him the binding until he is healed.
Capitol .viii.	The given text appears to be in an early form
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	For the restoration of ribs when they are broken.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Know that a fracture of the ribs does not occur except in thick places along the back; and at the ends of them, in front, it does not happen to those parts unless they are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And the knowledge of it is not hidden from the senses; you should investigate it with the fingers.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration should be such that you align the fracture with your fingers in the most possible way, until it is properly aligned as needed, and then apply a plaster and strengthen the broken bone with a splint, if necessary.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the ribs is inclined inward, then the patient will experience severe pain and puncturing sensations, similar to those who have pleurisy, because the bone affects the lining; and it leads to difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting blood; and this condition is difficult to cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And the ants are generated in that area by various kinds of decaying matter.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And concerning this, it is said: one must restrict the diet of the patient that generates inflation and flatulence, so that the stomach does not swell and expand, causing the fracture to be pressed outward.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	But let us beware of this so that it does not lightly cause the formation of an abscess from the cautery, if it should happen; and if it has already happened, then it helps to deal with it.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And some of them say that it should be paused over the cupping and then suck with strength; this seems reasonable, but nevertheless, there is a fear that the cupping might draw the excesses to the area due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And some of them say: the area should be covered with wool that has already been soaked in healing oil, and cushions should be placed between the ribs until it is filled, so that the binding is such as when you wrap around that second roundness; then the patient should be treated with a diet and medicine for pneumonia.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if the patient suffers from severe constriction that is not tolerated, and the bone punctures through the membrane with a wound, we fear for the patient; therefore, we must incise over the area, expose the fractured rib, and then place an instrument over it to support the spine, the memory of which precedes, and we should cut the bone easily and extract it.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And then we join the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with sutures, and treat it with plasters until it heals.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if an abscess forms inside, then you should cut it open and place pillows soaked in oiled cloth over the area, and treat the patient with what is appropriate for an internal abscess.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And let him lie on his side on which he sleeps until he is healed.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the restoration of fractures of the spine and neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Sometimes fractures occur in the bones of the neck, and similarly at their joints, and likewise in the vertebrae of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then consider: if their hands are already softened, numb, and lifeless, and they cannot move them, extend them, or grasp with them, and when you press them with your fingers or prick them with a needle and they feel no pain, then you know that they will not be healed, and in the months of such conditions, it is fatal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if you feel and sense a constriction with the fingers and puncture, then you know that the bone's socket is safe and that you will cure the patient with treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see signs of this in the vertebrae of the neck and want to know if it will heal or not, then consider the feet of the patient.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	And if you see that they are already softened, apply to those the same as what is applied to the muscles, and then when he lies on his back, there is windiness and discharge against his will, and sometimes he rolls onto his back and wants to urinate but cannot, then know that it is mortal, and thus do not labor in the treatment of him.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	But if none of those causes apply, the cause is better and lighter.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the treatment is to perform the sedation of the abscess by placing over the affected vertebra oil or fat, or poultices made from boiled eggs; place that over it several times a day until the abscess is sedated.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And now apply one of the comforting and stimulating plasters, and bind it tightly with a bandage; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility and not to sleep on the painful area until they are healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if the separation of the bone happens due to an injury or any cause that has already separated it from the body, then you must dry out the wound and remove that bone; then bring together the two edges of the wound, with sutures if it is large; then treat it with some flesh-growing ointment until it heals.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	And if the rear part of the bone in the buttocks, which is the end of the thigh bone, is fractured, then you must insert the finger of your left hand into the buttock and align the broken bone as much as possible with your other hand according to the principle of equalization; then apply a plaster and bandage if you have them available, and secure it firmly.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you find broken shards in the wound, then clean that area, remove them, and treat the wound with the previously described treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De restauracio de la ancha.	On the restoration of the ankle.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the ankles are often fractured, and when they break, the fracture is usually a communication at their ends, extending lengthwise and inclining inward. The patient feels pain in the area and may experience puncture-like sensations; additionally, the leg becomes numb when fractured.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over that area which is above the fracture, which is the shape of it.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is only at the extremity of it, then you should align that according to how you are accustomed by setting it so that it resembles its natural form.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	And if the fracture is in the spine or already extends to the lower parts, then you should have the patient lie on their stomach while you prepare the treatment for that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And once you have aligned that, apply a plaster over it, then place a splint of wood or bandage over it, and secure it tightly so that there is no concern about further fracture or displacement of the splint.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And align the concavity by filling it in such a way that it tightens according to equality, and instruct the patient to sleep on their back or on their side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	But if an inflammatory swelling occurs, then you should stop the extension and restoration of it until the swelling is reduced, and apply something to reduce that swelling as previously indicated; then return to the restoration of it and secure it properly.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if you accidentally break or crush the bones, then you treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	On the restoration of the fracture of the auxiliary [bone or limb].
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The auxiliary is that which is between the knee and the top of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, then its restoration is done in one of two ways, the first being that you take a flat splint of moderate thickness according to this form:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And let there be two ligaments at the two ends, and then let it be suspended from an elevated place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And place the patient on a seat; then extend their broken arm over the splint so that it reaches the tip of it at the midpoint where the curvature of the splint is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And then suspend something heavy over it, or the servant should extend it to the sides of it; and then the doctor should hold the fracture with their hands together until the fracture returns as it should.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other method is that the patient should lie supine on their back and suspend the arm of the collar with ligaments; then command two servants, one of whom should hold what is above the fracture with their hands, and the other should hold the part below it; each should extend to their respective side.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then you should pull on the fracture with one bandage and on the other side with another bandage, and each of the two assistants should pull from their respective sides.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And thus, if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, then it must be that half of the ligament should be placed on the tendon and the other left over the fracture with the knee bent.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And similarly, if the fracture is near the knee, then it must be bandaged over that area and over the knee.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Apply that with ease and do the work, then when it is properly adjusted as needed and applied correctly through proper application, strengthen that if an abscess does not occur.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	But if an abscess does occur, then leave the bandage on until the seventh day, and place over it wool soaked in vinegar and rose oil until the abscess heals, and then strengthen that area.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the method to strengthen that is to place a plaster over the fracture, then put a wrapping of clean cloth over the plaster; then adjust the arm with the support, and place your open hand over the muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And wrap the cloth and strengthen over the support the arm so that the arm is in a stable position, unless any cause from the broken bone prohibits this.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And now use braces.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And you should place over the fracture that splint which is longer and stronger than the other splints; and leave between each splint the width of a finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the break with an addition of three fingers on all sides.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then tighten over the plates with the device that I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And it is that your device over the site of the fracture should be tighter.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the fracture has been extended, the device should be looser.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And thus you adjust the position of the plates and the device as we have said at the time when you restore the limb to its proper position.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear an abscess may form, then you leave the device and the plates in place for up to seven days as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And then examine the wound in all parts for three days so that no pus or inflammation occurs in the area; it is prohibited for food [likely meaning nourishment or blood flow] to reach the limb due to the excess tightness of the device; and thus correct everything according to what we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	But if you are confident that no cause for this will occur, then do not loosen the bandage until three days or more have passed.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the patient's body lie on its back, and their hands be upon their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place over the splint a pad full of wool equally, and consider at any time of the night or day that the shape of the broken limb is not loose nor dissolved, or that the bandage is loosened; therefore, correct this entirely with your skill.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And place the diet of the patient according to the order which we mentioned before, in such a way that the diet is subtle at the beginning while it is started gently; and then it is necessary to make the diet of the patient more substantial.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	For it is customary for the splint and the bandage to be tight for forty days; and then they must be loosened, and a bath should be administered and treated with ointments that correct that condition.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is severe or grinding, then you should not loosen the bandage and the splints for ten days or up to two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	For the restoration of a fractured arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones which are called the ulna and radius; of these, one is smaller, and it is the one that forms the mentioned wrist, and the other is larger and is the one placed below the said smaller one, from the part lower down.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And often only the larger tendon is cut, or the smaller one, and often both are cut together.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the smaller tendon above is cut, then its restoration is easy, and its healing is even easier.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the tendon below is cut, then the fracture of it is bad, and its healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And worse than that is when two bones are broken together.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the broken part is the smaller tendon above, then it is appropriate for the doctor to facilitate its restoration with slight extension until it is aligned properly.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the large tendon is the one that is cut, then it is necessary to apply more forceful extension.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both tendons are cut together, then you must apply even stronger traction.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And you must position your hand appropriately for its restoration with the extension stretched over a cushion, and place the wrist of the hand above the fractured parts, more so than all other fingers, and the little finger should be lower than the others, and the patient should be sitting on a lowered chair.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And place a cushion in front of them at their height or straight ahead, so that the patient does not move around.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	Then the minister extends the arm of the affected side with his hand or with a bandage, and another minister extends it similarly.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	Then the doctor should realign the bone as he returns it to the best possible position.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if there is doubt in the fracture of the bone, then you must carefully reduce every piece to its proper place with your skill.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if it appears that there is a separate doubt about the joint and there is no hope in the restoration of it, then you should operate on it and remove that part according to the method we have described above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	But if the fracture is accompanied by inflammation, I have already dedicated a separate chapter to this, so refer to that chapter for the treatment.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you should line a cloth with a wax made from rubbed oil and white wax, which is of medium consistency between thick and thin, and place a strong cloth over it with a fine bandage until the abscess subsides; then remove the wax and apply a plaster prepared with ground powder and egg white, and then apply bandages; and let the bandage that is placed over the fracture be wider and stronger.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And you should know that the number of bones in the arm is seen in major dislocations, or it is a fracture in one piece or in two pieces together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And then place your bandage over the fracture site more strongly and forcefully, and when the bandage extends further up from the fracture or below it, make the bandaging a bit looser according to how it was described at the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moist, and not hard or rough, and the thread with which it is bound should be of the proper thickness between fine and thick, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And examine the limb and the joint after some days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if any cause occurs that requires correction, such as severe swelling in the limb, and now it is necessary to soak the limb in warm water until that swelling subsides.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And leave the limb unstrained until it rests, and then reapply the bandage.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the bandage is already loosened and the bone is properly aligned and appears correct, then adjust everything with your skill.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider if nourishment is prohibited from reaching the limb due to excessive constriction, for then you must soften that area slightly and leave it thus for several days until nutrition can flow back into it, and then strengthen that area.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	But if in the patient there is no occurrence of any cause from those we have mentioned, then it is not necessary to release them after about twenty days or so.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And then suspend the arm of the patient due to its restless movement, and make that person sleep on their back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or in thirty-two days, or it is often restored in twenty-eight days, and all of this depends on the condition of the compounds and the disposition of the power.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On the restoration of the fracture of the thumb and the fingers.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Know that the thumb of the hand and the joints of the fingers can indeed be fractured, and do not injure them unless absolutely necessary.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when you treat a fractured or injured hand, then the patient should follow a diet and in front of him place a splint according to equality, and then place his hand on it extended.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And then the practitioner should extend the broken bones, and the doctor should align those that are disjointed with proper alignment.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And now it is necessary to apply a plaster and wadding, if you do not want an abscess to form after the cautery; then place a cloth over it according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped that in a linen cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	And if the fracture is inside the palm of the abdomen, then make a ball of cloth, and instruct the patient to hold that with their fractured palm; then bind it with long cloth. 
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And let the wound be covered with cloth in which it is lifted, so that the body part is applied to the palm; and press it according to what is needed. 
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	And if the fracture is on the outer part of the limb, then you must place a splint and another splint under the fractured area in the palm, so that the hand remains open and straight; and then apply the bandage, just as the hand is turned towards the wrist between the fingers with ligaments.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if you encounter a fracture in one of the bones of the fingers, then it should be adjusted as needed and then strengthened with the palm. If you wish, place a small straight splint on it so that the fracture is raised and not pressed down.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	And if the fracture is in other fingers, such as those of the middle finger, or the index, or the thumb, or the ring finger, then it should be padded and tied with a bandage so that the injured finger remains still; or all can be bound continuously, which is better; or place a small splint on that area, just as we have said for the foot.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your treatment, and also in that case, the disposition of a hot abscess and its opposition — through your operation — with what is necessary when any cause of those occurs, according to the repeated narration of it.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter XIV.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	On the treatment of fractures of the thigh bone.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bone of the thigh is often fractured and this is evident to the senses as it causes the parts in front to shift and results in the most severe swelling.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the treatment of it is done in such a way that a bandage is tightened over the fracture and another bandage is placed below the fracture, and the patient is laid face down on their stomach.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And then the minister extends the entire limb to its part according to its quality when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And similarly, if the fracture is near the neck, then the bandage should be placed near the neck, and the extension should be made to the parts below it.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	Then the doctor equalizes the bone with both of his hands so that it is reduced according to its natural appearance and the bone is joined by a good union; at this time, it is necessary to apply a plaster and binding, unless an inflammation has occurred in the limb.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	But if inflammation occurs in it, then you should leave it for several days until the inflammation has subsided, and then return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The binding should be done as follows: you must wrap a hard bandage over the fracture, fold it two or three times, and remove any excess; then wrap the leg until you reach the ankle and the root of the thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert a long strip of cloth between the thigh and the leg near the hip and extending downwards, so that the ends of the cloth come out from the highest part of the two sides, and then wrap what is left of the bandage around the leg and the thigh.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And then place your hand over the thigh at the site of that fracture, and put a splint on the bone of the leg.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill the spaces between the leg and the thigh with soft cloths, so that the constriction is alleviated.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then begin with strong binding in the middle over the site of the fracture with three or four layers, and as you move away from the area of the fracture, make your binding looser and lighter and softer.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And then extend the two ends of the splint to the parts between where it reaches the ankle of the foot, and tighten both ends of the splints on the other side so that the binding does not move from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then apply the binding in such a way that it does not cause any damage to the limb, such as ulcers, burns, swelling, or similar issues; and if any of these conditions occur, you must loosen the binding, and correct whatever happened immediately, as we have said many times.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	And if there is a piece of bone that has become embedded in the bone itself, then you must scrape away as much of it as possible; and if not, remove it by force, and treat it with whatever method brings about recovery until it is healed. 
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And sometimes this thigh fracture is strengthened by binding it to stakes, just as we have said in the helper and in the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	However, in the restoration of the patient in such a manner, do not cause limping to the patient; and if it is restored alone, another application should be made to the other thigh, so that limping does not occur in the one that has been treated.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And know that the thigh is strengthened in forty days or a few more or less, and all of this depends on the diversity of the constitutions and other conditions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	On the restoration of the fracture of the collarbone.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Know that a fracture of the collarbone can often heal poorly, but it may also result in multiple adhesions.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	However, if it results in a fracture, then it is only a裂纹或断裂在其部位，这可能是由一种挫伤或六种挫伤引起的，关于这一点，所有的感受都已经描述过了。
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of it is such that what is broken in its parts should be aligned and joined together with those between which something is added and connected as much as possible by equalization, facilitation, and construction.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And then apply a plaster and place it over that round spot if you need to; and secure it with an appropriate binding.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And then consider all the treatments we have recommended for other fractures, such as applying a cautery to an abscess and similar procedures that are applied to any accident with what is appropriate until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On the restoration of a fracture in the thigh.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Know that in the thigh there are two bones, one of which is thick and is named for the thigh itself; the other is slender and is called the femur. 
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And it happens to some types of fractures what happens with the two bones of the arm, and by this, its restoration is done in the same way as the restoration of the arm equally, and its operation is the same.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if two bones are broken together, the rib cage is deformed in all directions.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the more delicate bone is fractured, the rib cage is deformed forward.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the thicker bone is broken, you will find that to be one of those causes that are not within your control. 
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And then administer extension, equalization, and ligature of the splints according to that alignment.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, if the fracture of the thigh is slight with small fragments, the extension should be less and lighter, and you should alleviate it with your skill.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the thigh, there is a reason for an operation on the arm, which is when you align the splints and complete your entire operation. At that time, you will take pieces of pine wood, which are placed under the causes that rest on supports, and are made essentially from palm branches; select those with small thickness, and not too thick ones, and the length of these should be according to the length of the thigh, and from the knee inward toward the foot.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then wrap each piece of cloth in two layers according to its length, and place one layer over the fractured part of the thigh on one side and the other on the opposite side, and they should extend from the knee down toward the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And then tie the two splints in three places at both ends and in the middle, because with this structure, the thigh is prevented from tilting to the right or left side, and remains in good alignment.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And already a wooden board has been administered according to the length of the chest; and it is placed on the patient's chest to prevent any movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And it is especially important that you do this in the case of a fracture, and when it is properly treated in that manner.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then, every day, examine the chest and study it with the knowledge gained from previous studies, and you guard it against abscesses, inflammation, or other similar causes; and if any of those causes occur, then apply what is necessary to it until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	On the fracture of the ankle and the bones of the foot and the toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	A complete fracture of the ankle does not usually occur; however, fractures do sometimes happen to the bones of the foot. Fractures to the toes are rare, and they only occur in cases of significant impact or improper positioning.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the foot do fracture and sometimes those bones become displaced from their positions, then the patient should place their foot on the prepared ground in such a way as described.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	And then place a pad over what is elevated from those bones, and then press on them, and push them back into their proper places in the area.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And then apply a plaster and bandage over it, and place a small board with two rounded ends under the foot.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And then secure that with the foot using a proper structure, since you have wrapped that with cloths and other materials as needed.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And after three or four days have passed, then you untie the bandage, for you will find the bones aligned, whether they were broken or dislocated, and the operation on them is thus as you know.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if some fingers are broken, then restore them, and align them as I have taught you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And then place a splint on the broken finger according to the length of the finger, and position it slightly to one side; then place under the foot the board that I have recommended to you, and secure it with a proper structure.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	And if what is ground from the bones is two or three or more, then you place over each finger a bandage of its quantity wrapped in linen cloth, and tie the table at the bottom of the foot, and stand on one end of the table to pierce the sole of the foot so that it has good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is important for you not to forget that you should not consider all the causes which are mentioned to you in other fractures and accidents we have discussed; and apply yourself to each accident with what is needed.
Capitol .xviii.	Capitol .xviii.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of the fracture of the pubic bone of the woman and of the bone of the penis and of the male organ.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the neck of the woman is broken, then make that person sit down on a low seat, and then incline that person slightly to one side, and hold them from behind. 
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And then the midwife fills the cotyle with wine, and it is done in his body just as hoped; and then the woman is shaken, and the back of the child is raised little by little, because all this is forgotten until it reaches the mouth of the cotyle just as hoped and the broken bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And then place pillows under his back, and when he wants to urinate, the tube comes out easily and then let him urinate, and reduce and return it in the manner in which you first introduced it, and then return him to his original pillow.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do this for seven days or around that time, for it is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you want, take a sheep's bladder and stretch a reed tube over his wound; insert the entire bladder into his anus, then blow into the tube with force so that the bladder inflates inside the anus, for the fracture will return to its place.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And then it should be filled with a tube and kept in place for several days as we have recommended, until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bone of the pelvis of a man or woman is broken, then administer in its restoration and setting what we have recommended for the hip bone.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And what is right is not hidden in these rare and nearby fractures, especially for one who has some study and use and understands my book well; for that fracture signifies to you the greatest correctness in its restoration and binding, and therefore understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	When it comes to the man's penis when it is crushed, take chicken fat and put the penis in that; then place a cloth wrapping over it, wrap it up, and leave it for three days or so, and it will be healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	On the restoration of fractured bones when they are damaged.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is advisable for one who suffers a fracture with an injury, and especially if the bone is large, such as the thigh bone or the jawbone, or similar to those, that you should cautery and perform trepanation on it immediately if the conditions for trepanation are suitable for you or are confirmed as we have said above.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the wound flows with blood, then you should apply cautery to stop the bleeding by sprinkling powdered agents over it, such as ashes, if there is no other reason against it.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	Then begin to restore the fracture on that very day, and do not delay this, unless an abscess occurs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	And if the broken bone protrudes above the skin surface, then it is necessary for you to carefully reduce and align it with your hands with ease and minimal extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	If extension is not prepared for you and the alignment of it with your hands, then you reduce that with your hands using this instrument; and the instrument which is made of iron, the length of which is seven or eight fingers, and the width of which is according to the amount of the injury; and therefore it is necessary for the doctor to take three or four of these according to what is needed for this in the treatment for any kind of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And let it be round, and let it have little thickness so that it does not bend when you apply pressure on it during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And let it have a sharp end with its edges at the extremities; and let the upper part of it be somewhat thick, and from the middle to the ends, it should be thinner.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the form of it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is named in Greek “labre volentz atelarem,” which means a small paddle.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	Therefore, it is necessary that the end of it be raised above the prominent part of the bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And push that in at once so that the bone returns, and be aligned with some adjustment. 
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And therefore force the ends of the fracture together, and if the broken end is delicate and does not hold the instrument firmly enough, then you must incise the end of that bone so that the instrument can have a good grip on it.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	And if you cannot reduce the bone completely as we have recommended, then incise it with one of the appropriate incisors that we have mentioned; or saw through it with one of the saws in whatever manner is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	Then smooth out what remains rough and bumpy on the bone.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced, and the patient finds intense pain during the reduction, then you know that the bone has not been returned to its natural position; and then do what you can to greatly aid the patient.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your restoration of the bone is complete, then soak a cloth in black styptic wine, and especially if it is summer, do not place cerot or any other ointment containing oil on the wound, so that it does not cause putrefaction and corruption.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then administer plasters at the time of the completion of the bone's restoration, and leave the wound uncovered in such a way that you cut off the scab with scissors and use bandages according to the extent of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And be careful to not strain the wound with the fracture, for many times foolish doctors have done this, causing their patients to suffer death or a corrosive or suppurative illness, which is gangrene.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if your fracture is light, soft, different from the other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the wound is large or is a bad wound, and you fear those accidents we have mentioned, and you find pain in the area, then it is not necessary to apply plasters there, but rather use a bandage of hard cloths instead of plasters and strain it with those.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And after one or two days when the wound begins to generate pus, then you should remove the cloth that you had placed over it, and then apply plasters, ointments with which we usually treat wounds, such as tetrapharmacum ointment and similar ones.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And it is necessary for you to loosen the bandage and examine the wound each morning and evening before it is fully healed and stabilized, and it must be that the member be prepared in such a manner that pus can run from it to its parts with ease.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If many days have passed since the wound and it has not healed nor been separated from the arm, then you know that there are small abscesses underneath which require you to examine the wound with a probe.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those abscesses that can be separated, remove and extract them; for those that cannot be separated and cause the limb to swell and induce pain, you should pierce them as much as it is possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if you encounter pus or ichor in the wound, which are signs of corruption and putrefaction, then it is necessary to treat each one with what is appropriate for its cure, as previously described in its respective chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And on this matter, my speech must focus and you should pay close attention: when a large bone is broken, elevate the limb as if it were the thigh or helper bones and similar to those of larger limbs, and do not assume traction or extraction, which can often lead to death; leave what remains inside to rot, for it will fall out on its own within 20 or 30 days; and then treat the wound if you can see it, otherwise leave it as is.
Capitol .xx.	The text provided appears to be in an
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	Here is the translation of the given line:
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider if the swelling is recent and administer among those medicines that have a styptic effect such as alum, ashes, myrtle, cicuta, acrisia, and similar ones; thus choose some or all of them, soak those with styptic wine, or egg white, or sweet wine, and place those on the swelling wrapped in tow, and bind those tightly to it with good constriction.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And leave the constriction on for several days without loosening it; then remove that and apply another one until the swelling is reduced; or press a piece of lead gently over it, because lead has the property of reducing all that is inflated in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if the swelling has already turned into a hardened state and is tight, and it is necessary to carefully remove it, then cut through the highest part of it, and excise the excess and protruding parts, or reduce it with cauterization until it is diminished; and care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	On the restoration of a fracture when it is restored and then the limb remains delicate and does not heal according to its natural state.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is restored, and then the limb remains thin and weak, this happens for only a few reasons: one of which is an excess of joint fluid and improperly done ligament repair; or due to excessive tightening of the ligaments that prevents nourishment from reaching the limb; or due to excessive external applications; or due to unnecessary movement at the wrong time; or due to lack of blood in the patient's body and their overall weakness.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the treatment for this is to feed the patient and make their heart tender until blood multiplies in them; administer baths; and introduce joy and happiness to them.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	Then place a plaster on the limb so that the plaster draws nourishment to it, or continue applying warm water treatments until nourishment flows and returns to its natural state.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	On the treatment of broken bones when they are restored crookedly and preventing the proper operation of them.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When you encounter a restored limb near the healing of it from curvature and prominence to the fractured bone and knotting, and this is due to the change in shape of the limb, although the limb is not restricted from its natural function, therefore, there is no need for you to heed the words of those who think that limb has been newly fractured.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	But there have been foolish doctors and restorers who have done this in our land; and this operation is highly condemnable, leading to great fear, the sign of which is mortal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	But if the lameness and knotting are recent, then they should be treated with tepid water in which softening herbs have been boiled, such as the leaves of elder and its roots, and mellilot, and similar ones; and a poultice should be made with a softening plaster like well-made diachylon; or mucilage from the root of elder should be taken and mixed with ground green vitriol or oil of ceram, and applied as a poultice; or fat figs should be crushed with pigeon droppings, and similar medicines known for strengthening consolidation.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And sometimes it is dissolved with persistent gentle friction using moist hands, and the limb should be moved in all directions at all times.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	Here is the translation of the provided text line by line into English:
Capitol .xxiii.	Capitol .xxiii.
De sermo en dislocacio.	From the discourse on dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is the displacement of some of the joints from their proper place, which prohibits movement, distorts the shape of the limb, and brings severe pain and serious injuries to the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when you encounter a dislocation, it must be reduced immediately, and do not delay the reduction, for if delayed, the area becomes inflamed and strong swelling makes the reduction of the dislocation difficult.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for this reason, it should not be massaged or stretched during the time of inflammation, as doing so can often cause spasms and intense pain.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	However, when this occurs, you must attend to the flaubotomy of the patient, and then wait until the inflammation subsides; afterward, the limb should be anointed with warm water and oil, and then it can be reduced with ease. 
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And every limb should be treated with that from which the memory will return to its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And I have already ordered the chapters of dislocation as they precede in fractures; from the part of the body most superior to the part more inferior.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Capitol .xxiiii.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	For the given line:
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	So dislocated the two jaws do not snap; and the dislocation of both is done according to one of two ways: that they are slightly moved from their places and softened a little; or they are dislocated completely and thoroughly, within which they are softened at the joint part where saliva flows from the patient and cannot hold it nor can close their mouth, and the tongue of the patient is wrapped in their words.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	When the dislocation of it is slight, then in most cases it returns by itself with little cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	But if the dislocation is complete and total, then it must be treated with a gentle reduction, and should not be delayed at all.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And it is that the minister holds the head of the patient, and the doctor inserts one finger of his hand into the area of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth if the dislocation is on one side; or he inserts both fingers together if the dislocation is on both sides, while keeping the other fingers outside to balance; and commands the patient to relax their jaws and allow them to move freely from each side; and the doctor aligns the jaw and pushes it until it returns to its place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated at the same time, then administer an evaporation with hot water and oil until a slight reduction of both occurs and do not delay the full reduction of both, as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And then when they are returned and aligned, and the patient's mouth is closed and does not soften, place over them cloths with cerot, which is made of wax and oil mixed together; and then bind it easily with soft bandages.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient sleep on their back, with their head resting between two pillows, so that they do not turn to the right or left; and do not force them to chew anything; rather, their food should be finely chopped until the pains are alleviated and the jaws are healed, at which point they may eat what they wish.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And this should be administered with ease, and do not work around the area of the mouth where eating and drinking occur, until the jaw is dislocated and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if it is difficult to reduce two dislocated jaws that have been displaced at some point and not returned to their places, then often fevers occur and there is frequent urination, and the patient’s abdomen becomes greatly inflamed, and vomiting of pure bile occurs.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see this, then know that it is a sign of destruction; and many times the one to whom this happens dies within ten days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	On the reduction of the dislocation of the clavicle and the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The clavicle is not dislocated inward due to its continuation with the sternum; and sometimes it is dislocated outward at the joint, and this is noticeable by feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of it is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And then compress the area with your palm using strong pressure, for it will return to its place.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And then place an ointment and pillows over that area and secure it firmly.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	However, the extremity that connects to the elbow and continues from there does not dislocate at any time; therefore, it must be reduced and aligned as we have said and according to what is suitable for you to handle. 
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And then place an ointment, and pillows, and bind it tightly, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until they are healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And with this method of treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced and brought back to its proper place when it is separated from its location.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the reduction of muscle dislocation.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle is dislocated in only three ways, one of which is when it is dislocated at the junction of the tendon to its attachment.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is when it is dislocated at the upper part of the muscle, and this happens slowly; and it is not dislocated behind by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated in front by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And it is more frequently dislocated outward at the lower parts of the tendon, especially in those whose muscles have little flesh, where it dislocates easily; but in those with more flesh, it comes out with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And when it happens that some men suffer from a blow or fall, and the muscle is swollen with a hot swelling, and is considered to be dislocated by this.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then it is necessary that you spread this over what you are certain about concerning him, and then proceed with his treatment.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And it is known that the dislocation exists when it is at the ends of the muscles; so that you can distinguish between a dislocated muscle and a healthy one, for there you find clear differences; you will notice on the head of the dislocated muscle a concavity where the tendons should be, feeling the head of the muscle like an egg; and the patient cannot bring their hand to their ear or move it in any way.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	And if the foot or its joint is dislocated, you will clearly feel it, and it is not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And this dislocation can be easily reduced when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction involves the practitioner raising the patient's arm to its upper parts; then place your thumbs below the tendons, and lift the joint forcefully back into its proper position, while the practitioner raises the patient’s arm and extends it outward; then hold it in place so that it returns easily.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	But if it does not return as described by what we have said and remains as it was at the beginning of the dislocation for several days, then the patient should be bathed in warm water and given a decoction that softens and relaxes, much like if one were to boil roots of elder, fenugreek, and mallows in water, and administer them.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And then the patient is laid on their back and placed upon a soft woolen pillow that is neither too light nor too rigid, and then the doctor places his foot on the sphere, elevates the head of the muscle with strength, and holds the arm of the patient so it does not slip out of place, and another assistant holds the head of the patient, so it does not shift out of position, for this will quickly return to its proper place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you want, reduce that according to this method: have a man present who is taller than the patient, standing on one side, and insert his thigh under the pillow of the patient and lift the pillow upwards so that the patient hangs in the air, and another assistant pulls the arm of the patient from below their belly.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	But if the patient is light, then it must be suspended with something else to weigh it down, for the dislocation will return quickly otherwise.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced in another way: a long pole with one end rounded like a mortar pestle, neither too thick nor too thin, should be planted in the ground. Then place the patient over this end; put lion’s skin or similar material on top of the pole where the patient lies according to the length of the pole. Extend the arm of the patient towards one side and pull it strongly from the other side, as the joint will return to its place quickly with force.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if the reduction of it is difficult due to all the causes we have mentioned, then use this treatment: and that is for you to take a rod whose length should be two arms' lengths, and its width should be four fingers, and the thickness of it should be lightened at one end like this form:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And then place linen cloths over the round head so that the splinter does not hurt the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And then the patient's body should be placed down, and the arm or hand should be extended over the stick between the parts below, and the stick should be tied to the support and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	And place the arm on a step of the ladder according to its latitude, and the hand should be extended towards the parts below it, and the other body part should be suspended from the other side, for the joint will soon come into place.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the insertion is complete according to whatever means possible for you, then place a small woolen ball of equal quantity; and then apply a plaster prepared with powdered molli (a herb), honey, and egg white over the entire muscle, so that it wraps around it, and then secure the small ball with a proper bandage; the bandage should be wrapped around the plaster, and the hand should be attached to the neck, and it should be left alone, and do not move the hand for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And it is necessary that the diet of the patient be light, until the limb is strengthened, for it is better for the recovery of him.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And then the diet should be gradually increased after seven or five days, and exercise should be started; and if it is stabilized and does not soften, then it is already healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	And if the joint is dislocated multiple times due to moisture affecting it or for other reasons, then a cautery with three burns must be administered in that area, as was previously stated in the chapter on cauterization.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this is done and after seven days the bandage is removed but the joint is not stabilized, and the plaster and binding are reapplied several times without it being fixed and the arm cannot be raised to the parts above, then you know that the nerves, which are at the end of the muscle, have been cut or stretched or weakened, and understand that the joint will never be properly set in its place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	Regarding the dislocation that occurs in the feet and ankle or the parts behind them, the reduction is done with impulse and extension using the hands until it returns to its proper position.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And another binding should be applied to that area, and care for it until it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if during the healing process, heaviness in the limb and slowness in its movement occur, then the patient should use baths multiple times until that heaviness is alleviated and it returns to its original natural state.
Capitol .xxvii.	Capitol .xxvii.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	Of the treatment for the dislocation of the knee.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	Know that the joint of the knee is displaced with difficulty and likewise returns with difficulty; and it can be dislocated in all directions, but more so forward than backward. The dislocation is not hidden from you when you see or touch it according to whatever shape it has been displaced into, and when you adjust the dislocated knee with your hand, this becomes clear to you, for the joint is concaved and cannot bend the leg, nor can it touch its own muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And it is necessary that you cool and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before an abscess forms, for if an abscess does form, reducing it becomes difficult, and even if healed, it may not be fully restored; especially when it occurs in the rear part, as this type of dislocation is worse than all others, more painful, and often leads to death with it.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce it, is that the leg should be extended with two hands, and the thigh should be spread out, and the doctor's hands should be on the knee and below it, and he should push the joint with the tips of his fingers together, or with the heel of his palm until it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	But if the dislocation is in the front parts, then return it by bending the hand with his hand, so that he strikes the thigh with the edge of his palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not obey to the reduction, then administer strong extension and forceful movement.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And it is that two ministers extend the arm, and hold that limb with two ministers so that the extension is not weakened.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	Then the arm should be rotated in all directions, since it is wrapped with a long folded cloth over his hand or joint.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, anoint it with some oil so that those causes which help in the lubrication of the joint are facilitated; then push the joint forcefully until it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And after the reduction of the dislocated part, it should be placed on a bandage that has styptic and cleansing properties with egg white, and should be tightened with a downward traction, and the arm should be suspended from the neck, and left like this for several days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then it should be loosened; and if the joint is properly set in its place, then you untie the bandage from it and leave it.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see the joint not properly bound, then you should reapply the plaster and the bandage, and leave it for several days until it is tightly bound; then remove it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	And if the injury is severe near the reduction of the joint, and the position of it is in motion, then administer moistening with baths and gentle friction, and compression, until it is relieved; or place a supporting bandage over the joint to prevent movement, which is a matter of fatty motion; then bind it, and leave it that way on the bone day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	Then remove that, and place it in a bath; and when it is warm, then gently rub the joint with moderate friction, and then reapply the supporting bandage over it, which is a wrap for motion, once, and the second time, and the third time.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	using bathing treatment until it is smoothed out.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, place a split from a wet and scraped cow's hide over it and bind it tightly; do this several times, for it is moist and will help return it to its proper position.
Capitol .xxviii.	Capitol .xxviii.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	For the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder, which is the joint between the arm and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	When the hand joint sometimes becomes dislocated, and the reduction of its dislocation is easy, the opposite is true for other joints; however, it must be done quickly in reducing it at the moment when it becomes dislocated, before the area becomes inflamed or an abscess forms there.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	The reduction of its dislocation is that you place the patient's hand joint on a table and have an assistant extend the hand, while the doctor places their hand or palm on the prominence of the joint and pushes it until it returns to its proper place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, it must be considered that if the palm is already dislocated towards the front of the hand, then the patient should place the back of their hand on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is towards the back of the hand, then the position of the hand should be naturally placed on the table so that the doctor's hand can press on the prominence of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And if it returns immediately, that is good; if not, then strengthen that area with a soft bandage to prevent inflammation and leave it be; do not repeat this process, because if you do, it will not tolerate or allow for the reduction of pus that may form over the days.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	But nevertheless the joint remains according to its curvature; and you find no cause in the patient other than that the hand is softened and cannot grasp any cause; therefore know that the nerves are cut or crushed, and now there is nothing but to strengthen it with a cautery near the injury and thus bring about some effect.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	When the limb has been returned, then place over it the bandage we have recommended, and let it be left and strengthened for five days; then let it be loosened and left, and the hand of the patient should be exercised.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	But if the movement of it is hindered and some gravity befalls it, then ease it with warm water and by friction several times until it is relieved.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	On the treatment of dislocation of the fingers.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Sometimes the fingers are dislocated entirely.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when any finger of those is dislocated on the back of the palm or on its belly, then hold the finger and push the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And then support the head of the finger, and suspend that part which is dislocated, and leave it like that for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then suspend it and extend it until it is properly straightened out on that same day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when it is not yet straight, wrap it according to that method, and do not stop unwrapping it during the day and exercising with movement, and wrap it again at night; do this for several days until it is straight.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And do similarly if it is dislocated at the wrist; wrap it in that area and perform this as your first operation until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And similarly do the same when it is dislocated in other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	On the treatment of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When a complete dislocation occurs in any of the vertebrae of the back or neck, and multiple vertebrae are displaced from their positions, then there is no cure, for death awaits the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And the sign of this is that the excretion of the patient is expelled beyond their will, and they cannot retain it; and many times some members of theirs or both sides of their chest or both arms are softened; or a vertebra is displaced from its place, for often it is dislodged and sometimes its displacement affects four parts.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	And when it is dislodged to the parts behind, it is called gelbozitation (a term that seems specific and may not have a direct translation but could refer to a condition involving displacement or misalignment in the rear regions of the body
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	And the cure for it is that you should consider whether the gelbozitation occurred in early childhood, because in that case there is no cure and it cannot be fully healed.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	But for those cases that occur due to trauma or impact or similar causes, the Ancients have described in lengthy discourse the methods of cure, most of which prove beneficial; but I have abbreviated this, excusing the brevity from the excess of it, by my proximity to my own understanding and exposition, with which I have explained and formed this using a different instrument than that with which they would show and explain it.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And it says that in the case of gout that affects from the front part down to the feet, there is neither remedy nor healing for that; and similarly in the case that affects both sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And of those, it is only cured when it affects the back specifically with what I recommend.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And it is that the patient should be laid face down on a soft pillow near the wall, and their legs should be stretched out below them with a moist plaster so that their feet are not hurt.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	Then a straight pole should be placed, inserted into the ground at the end of the pillow near their head, and another pole across their feet at the other end of the pillow.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And the minister should hold the pole, and it should not be fixed in a hole; and another minister should hold the other pole in the same manner.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Then wrap around the head of the patient and place a thin cloth loosely on it; extend one end of the cloth to the pole that is opposite their head, and tie it there; then secure another strap over their hips, below their thighs, and opposite their chest; then adjust all the straps and tie them to the other pole that is opposite their feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And then the minister extends the ligament to the part of the bone, and the two bones and the ligaments are not left in their original places where they were inserted, but rather they are not fixed as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor places his palms on the spine with strength until it returns, or he places them on a table, and then he adjusts the patient's feet on the table until they return.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	But if it does not return by this method, then take a table whose width or length is about three cubits, and excavate in the wall where we said was near the patient a place into which fits one end of the table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And then place the middle of the table on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and presses well so that the spine is compressed and returns to its proper place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, use a crank that is turned by hand; and this is how you do it: place the head of the patient at the end of two poles, the length of which should be one arm's length, and place the head of the patient at the end of another set of two poles as well; and the distance between each pole should be a palm, and already there should be a hole in each pole through which the crank turns, and each end should be firmly fixed to the ground so that it does not move.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And there should be one round pole in which the crank is placed, and it should rotate within the two holes of the two poles.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of it, there is a hole in which the pole is inserted, the length of which is one palm including what rotates; and in the other two poles, it is similar to this.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then tighten the straps that you have fastened to the feet of the patient at the hole where his head is placed, and the straps that you have secured to his thighs on the crank where his feet are placed.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then you should place each turn and let a minister twist the turn with his hand, and the doctor applies the splint as we have said. 
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the form of the treatment:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And when the vertebra is returned to its place and the area is leveled, it is necessary to apply a dried poultice with egg white and then lint; then place on the poultice strips of cloth whose width should be about three fingers or thereabouts, and the length should cover the area of the spondylitis, and over the part of the vertebra itself.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then bind it with the bandage we have mentioned, and let the patient consume subtle nutrients until they are healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if any prominence remains in the area at the end of the healing process, then it is necessary to administer medicines that soften and reduce it through prolonged use of the table we have recommended; and a plate of lead is already applied to that area.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And sometimes there is prominence in the area of the vertebrae of the back, and it is painful due to that dislocation; and it is that bone which protrudes so much that you should not apply this medicine to it, for it could cause fatal harm to you.
Capitol .xxxi.	Capitol .xxxi.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	For the given line "De curacio de anca dislocata," a translation into English would
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle only suffer from dislocation, and not what happens to other joints with small movements and cavities.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the joint of the ankle is dislocated in four ways, for it is dislocated inward, or outward, or forward, or backward.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And it is most frequently dislocated inward, and rarely forward or backward.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And the sign of dislocation inward is that when you align the leg of the patient with the healthy one, it appears longer and the heel more prominent than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their foot properly, and there is swelling at the site where the tendons are inflamed by a hematoma, so that the head of the thigh has moved here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the sign of dislocation outward is that the symptoms of it are contrary to those of the inward dislocation.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	And the sign of dislocation forward is that the leg extends fully, but it cannot bend due to the pain in the heel, and if one attempts to walk, they cannot do so properly; the urine of the patient is retained, and the tendons are inflamed, making movement over the talus difficult.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And the sign of the one to whom a dislocation occurs in the rear parts is that he cannot straighten his leg, nor can he bend the front part before bending the knee, and the thigh on that side is shorter than the other, and the knee is softened, and the head of the femur is displaced from its position.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	More about the types of this dislocation you consider now: if the dislocation is old and ancient, which has already become accustomed with time to its current state, then you administer reduction to it and leave it in its present position; however, this is not a complete cure; therefore, it does not need prophylaxis in that case.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	But for the one in whom the dislocation is recent and is one of the four types of dislocation, you must take care to return the joint to its place, extend it both internally and externally, and move it to the right and left, because it easily returns to its proper position and does not require further treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	However, if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a strong assistant and extend the shoulder of the patient from below, either by his hands or with a bandage that is tied over the shoulder on top of the neck; another assistant should extend the hand above the elbow placing their hands under the patient’s elbows; then bind tightly with a bandage over the root of the arm, and have another assistant hold the end of the bandage.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And if the extension of it or of the part inside is bent towards the forked part, or of the part behind towards the back part.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And let the extension of all these at once be such that the patient is lifted with their body off the ground and remains suspended.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this kind of extension is common to all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And therefore, if the dislocation returns as we have said, it is good; and if not, then in every case it is necessary to speak of the proper treatment.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of the dislocation, when it is displaced inwardly, the patient must be laid on their side; and then place the ligaments over the edge of the thigh in that spot which is between the head of the thigh and where the kneecap lies; and then extend the ligament upward from the knee area to the highest part of the fork (likely referring to the hip joint).
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And then another minister should firmly take the arms of the patient, and press the thick area of the affected thigh and extend towards the outer parts with strong extension, because this will return it to its proper place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this species is a light cure with which this member is reduced, as compared to the other species.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	And if it is excused from you and you do not obey this method of treatment entirely, then the feet of the patient must be tied together with a strong, light binding over both ankles and both toes. 
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And let the length of each thigh be the quantity of four fingers, and let the sick person's chest be extended more than the other by the quantity of two fingers. 
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And then the patient should be suspended above the head of the post, and he should be in a room; and the length from the ground should be the quantity of two arm-spans.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And then command a strong young man to hold the patient's thigh, and let another young man suspend the patient, while the other young man forcefully pushes the thigh, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	And in the proper reduction, when there is a dislocation at the outer part, the patient must lie on their back according to what we have recommended in having them cooled; and the limb of the affected side should be firmly secured over the chest and on the feet properly. 
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And then two sticks should be placed, one under the feet of the patient and the other under the head; and then sticks adjusted to the middle of the thigh should be placed, on which wet cloths are wrapped, so that the patient is not harmed by the stick being between their thighs, for you must ensure that the extension to the parts underneath is not hindered.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And then each minister extends to their part, and the doctor with his hand equalizes the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Thus, if it yields to reversal, it will improve greatly; otherwise, place pressure on it diligently as we have said for gout by equalizing it in this manner.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	However, the patient should lie on their side quietly.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is in the frontal parts, then it is necessary to gently extend the chest, and this follows the same procedure as for the thigh; the doctor places the palm of their right hand on the displaced joint, and then compresses it with the other hand, and through this compression, extends the area underneath towards the back part.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is in the rear parts, then it is not necessary for the patient to be extended outwards, and they should be raised above the ground; instead, they must lie on a hard surface, just as when treating someone whose shoulder has been dislocated outwardly, according to what we have said about placing them between two boards; and they should be face down with their limbs extended, as we have mentioned, without delay.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And compression must be applied with a board over the area where the joint is.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Thus, when the reduction is completed as necessary — and the sign that the reduction has been successful is not hidden from you, which is to extend both arms of the patient, and when you see them equal and the patient stretches out their arm and expands its function, then you know that the limb has returned as it should — at this point, you align both thighs, place a splint, and bind with bandages so that the shoulder is not moved in any part; and confine the patient to rest for three or four days.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And then remove the bandage and the splint, and compare one arm with the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	When you see those marks on their body, then know that the dislocation has been fixed, and then let the patient go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any cause of softening, then you return and plaster that area, and stretch it according to your initial structure, and leave it for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	Then loosen that area, and let it remain in ambulation for several days until it is strengthened.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The shoulder is dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated outward, inward, and more to the back; it is not dislocated toward the front.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of its dislocation is that you ask the patient to apply their chest with the thigh; then you will know that the shoulder is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration for all types of dislocation is to have the patient stand straight, ensuring that they extend their chest if possible; then press your face against theirs, and place their foot between your feet; then hold their shoulder with your palms, keeping them between your thumbs on their shoulder with strength, and another assistant should stretch their arm until the shoulder returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And a sign of recovery is that the patient's chest adheres to the thigh without effort.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then apply a plaster to that and make the chest adhere to the thigh, then bind those areas with a bandage for three or four days, and then unbind them.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not let the patient walk for several days until they are healed and strengthened.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	But if returning the hernia or intestine to its proper place is necessary, then administer strong extension using ligaments as previously described in the treatment of the hip.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	On the treatment of dislocation of the talus.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The talus is sometimes displaced by a slight movement and sometimes dislocated completely. The dislocation occurs either towards the inside or towards the outside.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of its dislocation is that sometimes the talus swells at the side to which it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	And the treatment for the dislocation is usually a reduction, and it should be extended with ease using the hands and smoothed in before returning.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	And in the treatment when it is dislocated according to circumstances, you must make the patient stand straight, and have a strong and valiant helper from behind the back of that person at the middle part of them.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And then you take hold of the foot with your right hand on the upper part and with your left hand on the lower part near the ankle.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with your left hand for two turns, and then extend with your left hand; and push the sole of the foot with your right hand away from the chest.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And do this twice as we have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then push the sole of the foot towards the chest for the third time, and you should be at the ankle.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	Thus, return in one turn or two according to this method, and if you can rotate the foot freely, it is good; and if not, then repeat the operation on it until it returns.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if it is impossible for you to reduce it by the method we have recommended, then have the patient lie on their back on the ground, and place a small bolster tightly on the ground between the patient's thighs, and wrap a cloth around it so that the patient does not feel any discomfort.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And then the minister holds the patient's thighs, and another minister extends the foot with their hands or with a ligament that lies over the heel; and then each minister extends against the extension of his partner, and the penis is extended between the patient’s thighs retaining it thus, so that the body of the patient is not pulled towards the side due to its extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And then the doctor aligns the dislocation with his hands, and another minister holds the healthy thigh on that side, for the dislocation returns easily.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And when the dislocation is returned and you confirm the health of the reduction, then apply a poultice and wrap it tightly with strong bandages, and bind the foot to the chest with bandages.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And you must be careful of the nerves that are behind the ankle, so that the bandage over it is not too tight and does not compress them strongly.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And then leave it for two or three days; and if the bandage becomes loosened, tighten it again.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And then unbind that on the third or fourth day, and prohibit the patient from bathing for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	And if it is necessary to move before that time, there is no guarantee that the dislocation will not be dissolved and corrupted, and thus it will not receive proper healing.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if you encounter an abscess that needs cauterization, then it is necessary to administer what was previously described in our narration, at another site for treatment and application, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter XXXIV.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	On the treatment of dislocation of the toes of the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	It is necessary that which is dislocated be treated with slight extension without excessive force; and this should not be difficult, as it should be gentle.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	However, if the dislocation is in the toes of the foot, then it is necessary to have the patient place their foot on a level surface of the ground or on a table, and let them stand thus as if they were walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And then you stand on your feet, and place your foot over the area near the joints that you are addressing, and then press that area with your foot to force it back into place, and ensure that it is flattened and does not appear raised in that spot.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And then place the patient's foot on a table that takes up the entire foot, which has two ends, and then tightly bind it with proper and firm bandages for three days; and then loosen it and allow the patient to rest without walking for several days, until it is properly healed and recovery is ensured.
Capitol .xxxv.	It seems like you've provided a chapter or section
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Here is the translation of the provided text:
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When you encounter any of those causes and you engage in the treatment and restoration of it, death often occurs.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And for this reason, it is not necessary that the one who presumes himself over the treatment of him [the patient] be someone who simply assumes expertise, but rather someone who is wise in the art, experienced long-term, merciful and compassionate, cautious, not rash nor presumptuous; and who uses at the beginning medicines that alleviate swellings caused only thus, and leaves the patient to divine judgment, but to one from whom you hope for health from destruction, some relief from illness, and in which there appears some hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And then strive as quickly as possible to reduce the cause at its origin in the beginning, before it develops into an abscess.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then if the limb returns as we want, administer treatment that prevents the abscess from forming and cure the wound with one of the most drying ointments suitable for it.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if a dislocation is accompanied by a fracture and occurs in the separated bones, then you should pierce their joint, and proceed as we have said for simple injuries of that which precedes in the areas of those [bones].
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And beware and avoid, according to your strength, those in the paths of fear as my teaching precedes you; for this is better for you to serve your Creator, and more enduring for your glory, and you will find greater health for your body in doing so throughout your life.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus, perfect the words of Al-Bucasis, may God bless him.
Amen.	Amen.
