Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begins the words of Albucaсим.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre,  
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For the operation with the hand is prohibited in our region and in our time, so much so that there is barely any trace of its knowledge remaining; and nothing remains of it except some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have been largely altered and led to errors and confusion such that the meanings are closed off and the power and art have been weakened.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it is seen by me that I revivify that matter according to the order of this treatise in such a way through the method of exposition and explanation and abbreviation; and so that it comes with the forms of the tools of cautery and other instruments of the work, as if by addition of the explanation, and for preparation of it, which cause is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	But the cause for which a good craftsman is not found with his hand in our time is that the art of medicine is long, and requires its practitioner to be exercised beforehand in the science of anatomy, which tells us that one must know the joints of the members and their forms, as well as their conjunction and separation; and have knowledge of the bones, nerves, and veins, and their number and extension; and of the pulsating and quiet veins, and the places of their origin.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And for this reason Hippocrates says that in name it is small, but in action it is great, and especially in the art of the hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	But we have already spoken of this in the introduction of this book; for one who is not knowledgeable about what we have said concerning anatomy will not avoid falling into error, through which many people may die, as I have seen too many of such cases, for some are formed in this science and then fall away from it due to a lack of knowledge and experience.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For I saw an inexperienced and unskilled doctor incise an scrophulous abscess on a woman's neck, and cut some arteries of the neck so that a great amount of blood flowed, causing the woman to die in the hands of the doctor.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another doctor who took out a stone from a man who had suffered in his condition, and the stone was large, and he came to him and extracted that stone with a piece of the bladder, because that man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I have already called for it to be extracted, and saw that due to the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, he would die under it.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And you saw another doctor who was receiving payment from a duke of our land for surgery, and came upon a black castrated man who had a fracture in his thigh; and the doctor prepared with his ignorance, extracted the fracture, over the wound, with cushions and splints with strong binding, and did not leave the wound to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And then release the bandage according to his wishes, and then relieve him, and then keep him dry for several days and command that we loosen the binding; and this is so until the thigh and foot become inflamed, and it leads to destruction.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I was called to him, and prepared to loosen the binding, and succeeded in bringing calm and easing his pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	However, corruption had already set in the member, so it could not be restrained, and the corruption did not cease to spread throughout the limb until the patient was at peril.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And you see another doctor who punctures a cancerous abscess, and it became ulcerated after about those days, during which the malignancy of it was exacerbated by its lord.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The given line translates as follows:
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And by this, sons, it is necessary for you to divide the operation with your hand into two parts: one part is an operation that is associated with health, and the other is a work in which there is danger in the greatest decisions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already expressed this in every part of this book where I find an operation that contains error and fear; therefore, it is necessary for you to keep this in mind and let go of the other, so that the pages do not lead you to speak and dishonor yourself.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore, take up your weapons with diligence and the protection of God, and face your illnesses with happiness and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best way by the grace of God to achieve health and honorable success, and leave behind terrible illnesses that are difficult to heal, and keep your weapons away from what makes you fear, so that hesitation in your faith and in your name does not evade you: for more enduring is your glory, and more abundant in this world and later for your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Gualia already mentioned in some of his minor works:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Do not treat bad illnesses, lest you be named a bad doctor.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have divided this book into three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter is ordered concerning the head to the feet, in the forms of the instruments and in the tools of the cauteries, and about what is necessary in the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, on drying and puncturing, and on cupping, and on plasters, and on the extraction of arrows and similar objects, all chapters categorized and ordered by the forms of the instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the treatment of fractures and similar conditions; a chapter ordered from head to foot, and about the forms of the instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	On cauteries with fire and with sharp medicine and a reminder of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	With this, the treatise on the entire book begins.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	It is necessary for me to speak of the benefits of that cautery and its drawbacks, and in what conditions the use of a cautery is prohibited.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore, I say that the discussion about the quality of the benefit and harm of cauterization is long and verbose, subtle due to knowledge, and secretive; many wise people have spoken about it, and they disagree on it, and for me a little bit of their discussions is enough, fearing lengthiness.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore I say that cautery is beneficial to all kinds of swellings universally, whether they are with matter or without matter, except for two types of swellings, which are swellings in the tail without matter. 
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the complex condition that is dry and hot, there is disagreement regarding treatment; for some say that a cautery is helpful in such cases, while others say the opposite, that a cautery is not suitable for an illness which is by nature hot and dry, because the quality of fire is heat and dryness, and it is inappropriate to treat a hot and dry illness with something that is also hot and dry.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And says the one who argues against this, that a cautery is beneficial in all hot and dry illnesses that occur in human bodies, because when you compare the body of a person and its moistures to the composition of fire, you find that the human body is cold. 
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say by the speech of that one, who has experienced this already several times to me openly. 
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	But nevertheless, it is not necessary for one who has already been exposed and exercised in the chapter of cauterization by previous practice, and has known the diversity of human constitution and the disposition of diseases within them, and the causes thereof, and their accidents, and the time span of those.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	And in other conditions, there is no need for fear, especially in cold and wet diseases, because all doctors agree on these, and they do not disagree about treating them with cautery.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, sons, that the secret of healing through cautery with fire and its effectiveness lies particularly in the use of fire along with a burning medicine. For fire is simple, its action only reaching the member which is cauterized and not significantly affecting the adjacent member except with minor harm.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	And here is the translation of the given sentence:
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	More so, the fire, due to its sublimity and goodness of substance, does not do this but rather overflows. And it is already known to us through experience and through a long period of study in the art regarding the truth of causes; and because of this, I am excused from the lengthiness of the speech. But if it were not that my book is hidden away with fire, and the quality of its operation on bodies and its expulsion by which you expel illnesses, demonstrated through a philosophical and demonstrative discourse, would be sharp in your minds.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, sons, that they forget the time in which it is appropriate to perform cautery and wait for the best time of spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that cautery is appropriate at all times, so that the harm from accidental time is submerged in the benefit of what is drawn by the cautery, and especially if the cautery is for necessary pains or strong and sudden ones, which do not tolerate delay because it is feared that mischief will come, which is greater than a small harm entering through the time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And this does not fall on your feet, or, sons, it is only esteemed by the common people and foolish doctors, which is why for that disease that is healed by cautery it is not always recommended, and they pause at that consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not as they think it to be because of this, for a cautery is nothing more than a form of medicine that alters the composition and dries out the humidity which is the cause of the pain.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	However, superfluous cauteries on medicine due to the desire for their health and virtue of their operation and greatness of their lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that their illness may return at some time in the future, according to the complexity of the patient and the location of their illness, as well as their strength, and what has been prepared within their body due to the accumulation of excesses within them, and what they have acquired through food and similar causes; however, if cautery is administered for an illness that is subtle in a member with few excesses and moistures, such as tooth cautery for pain and similar conditions, it is possible that this pain will not return to them, although this applies only partially.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And the common saying is that cautery is the last resort of medicine, and this saying is true, not in the way some people understand it, for I believe that there is no cure that truly helps without medicine or any other cause before resorting to cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is contrary to that; the intention that cautery is the last resort of medicine is only when we administer methods of cure in some illnesses and those medicines do not produce results, and then at the end of the treatment process, one administers cautery, and it helps in that case.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And from here on out, the cautery is considered the last resort of medicine, not according to the understanding of the common people and too many foolish doctors. 
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the subtlety of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they say that the place of cautery does not burn, which is not absolutely true, for I have experienced this and found that it only happens in some bodies, not all others; cautery with that method is good and better than iron as they said; however when you do cautery with fire with gold, it is not declared to you, for it ignites according to the quantity you want by the heat of the gold, and because it prepares to receive cold; and if you apply it over the area the ignition melts the gold due to the fire, and some layers fall into the fire so that the craftsman cuts through the occupation of that. 
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And for this reason, cauteries are made with an iron that is applied lightly and precisely during the operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already arranged this chapter concerning the cautery according to sections, and I have organized those of the head between the feet, so that I can quickly provide the inquirer with what they seek from it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Of cautery for headache caused by coldness and humidity.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization you apply to moisture and coldness on the accidental site of which are causes; it is caused by soda and a multitude of rheumatic fluxes, called catarrh, from the head down to the areas around the eyes and ears, and a multitude of sleepiness, toothache, and throat pain, and universally for all diseases that come from coldness, such as paralysis, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cauterization is as follows: first, you command the patient to be evacuated with a purgative medicine for three or four nights, according to the strength of the patient, their age, and their habits.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command him to shave his head with a razor. Then have that person lie down between your hands on a lowered bench and place his hands on his feet.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then place the tip of your palm near the nostrils on the ridge of the nose between his eyes.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, when the middle spot has been reached with your finger, mark that place with a thread, and then ignite the olive-shaped cautery which is of this form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then place that over the marked area with cloth, in such a way that it descends, with which your hand is gradually constrained, and you rotate that.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then lift your hand gently and look at the area, and if you see any part of the bone exposed, about the size of a grain of barley, then raise your hand; and if it does not return with that instrument, use another one, if it is cooled down, until you can see the bone as I have told you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a little salt and dissolve it over the area and leave it for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then place over it a cloth soaked in oil and leave it there until the heat of the burn is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with a tetrapharmacum ointment until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And it has also been said that when the wound remains open, applying honey is better, because it is more beneficial and healing.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And some of them say that the area around the bone should be cauterized, and the cautery should be applied until some part of the substance of the bone adheres.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then scrape away what is attached to the bone, and then clean it.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And others said that with the cautery, one should reach the rear area, pressing strongly into the bone until it gives way, and this is the method of performing a small alveolation.
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they believe that from that place, vapors emanate to the head.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And the wound should be kept open for a long time, and then it should be treated until it is healed and solidified.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	But I have not seen these two types of cautery used universally, but only in some people as a method of caution; and leave that aside, you must tell me, it is better for health when it occurs; for the head can be damaged by a discontinuity in its structure, as we have testified in other members, and especially so when the patient's head has a fragile nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first type of cautery is safer and better, you must tell me; and with that method and by working in this way, it is more beneficial to health.
Capitol segon.	Chapter two.
Del cauteri del cap.	About the cautery of the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When chronic and prolonged pain affects the entire head of the patient and treatments such as bloodletting, cupping, head cleansing, plasters, washes, ointments, poultices, and similar remedies have been used, especially if cautery with a cautery that has not proven effective or beneficial for those causes has already been applied, then consider whether the patient's head is naturally prone to strong reactions; and it is not cold but rather experiences significant heat, in which case another type of cautery should be used instead of the previous one.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	Then apply cautery on the horn of his head with a cautery in which the chain is divided. 
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the tendon and expose the bone by the amount we have recounted and cauterize that area with a cautery on the rear part of the head in the location which is called the sinus, — and it is that place where the suction cup is placed.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And move your hand in this manner, and do not expose the bone, for the patient will find much greater pain from this different from the pain of all other cauteries on the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I will describe this cautery in its place, for the cautery with which you cauterize the horns of the head and the occiput is a finer cautery than that with which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is its form.
Capitol ters.	Third chapter.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	On the cautery of non-traditional migraines.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When severe pain occurs in the part of the head, or if the pain spreads within the eye, the head should be cleansed with medicines, and other treatments, which I have described in the sections on diseases, should be administered; and if all this is not effective, then cautery can be applied in two ways: either by cauterization with an acute burning medicine, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	And with a hot cautery combined with medicine, you should take an onion and burn it, sealing the extremities of it from both ends.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then cut into the painful area on the temple with a slanted lancet until you reach the affected spot that needs to be drained.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And then apply pressure to it using compression bandages tightly, and leave it for the duration of three hours; then remove them and bring it out, and let the wound rest for two or three days, and then place a cloth soaked in ointment over it until the area becomes red.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish, do this with some caustic medicines, which I have written about in the two treatises on caustic medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	But the cautery should be done with iron according to this method: make it in the shape of this cautery:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	It is called "claus clavilhs" because the end of it resembles the shape of a clove with some curvature, and in the middle part, there is a small prominence.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And then place it on the site of the pain, and keep your hand steady — so that the artery below does not adhere to it — and rotate the iron little by little with speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the quantity of it that is adhered by the pressure of the chain is such that half of it, and lift your hand so that the artery is not adhered to which is below, so that blood does not flow.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then soak a cloth in salt water and place it on the area, and leave it there for three days; and then apply a cloth moistened with ointment, and then treat with an unguent until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you must, cauterize with the tip of the cautery iron as a cautery tool, and be careful not to cut an artery in this non-traditional migration area. 
Capitol quart.	Capitol quart.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Of the ancient method of cauterizing migraines.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat migraines using the methods we have mentioned for previous treatments and those discussed in the sections on illnesses, and if the treatment does not prove effective, and sometimes due to the illness, what has been said about the first cauterization with medicine or by fire is insufficient, then you must heat the knife-shaped cautery until it becomes white-hot, and mark the site of the pain with a line as long as half a finger-width; then place your hand over it once and press firmly before incising the artery and reaching the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to be careful with the continuity of the jaw, which is important for chewing, and ensure that the tendon is not adhered and the nerves are not damaged by it, so as to avoid spasms.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it concerns the protection and caution of the blood flow from the artery that is to be cut, for there is fear in the act of cutting, especially for those who do not know what they are doing and are not studious or experienced; and they should not begin the operation.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And I come with a reminder of the regimen for blood flow accidents from the artery according to its manner, in its place within this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see that this disease is not cured by this cautery and the body of the patient can endure it, apply the cautery to the middle of the head as we have described, and treat the plague until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you want to apply the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter on arrow wounds with a cautery having two blades, this kind of cauterization is better and more suitable.
Capitol .v.	Capitol .v.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Of the cauterization of ear pains.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When in the ear comes pain due to cold and is treated with laxatives and with the other cure which I have mentioned in the division, and if the pain does not abate, then apply the cautery, and this is the one called puncta, of which this is the form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And then apply near the inflammation, and be guided around the entire ear just as a wheel is rotated, or in the circumference of each segment if the pain is in each one.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Stretch out with the knife-like cautery along the rim of the ear slowly so that you have felt the area with your fingers first. 
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery of these points is done throughout the entire ear, and cleanses that area, then heal the places in between so that they become healthy.
Capitol .vi.	Capitol .vi.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Of the cauterization of tumors.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	A tumor that is treated and cured by cauterization is one of the types that come from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cauterization for the type that results from drying or spasm of the nerves.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that type of tumor with poultices, purges, and fumigations, and your treatment does not improve the condition, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one should be placed at the lobe of the ear, the second a little below their temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And place your cautery on the opposite part of the diseased area, for moistening only occurs in the part that appears healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the method of cauterization is to cauterize that area with the cautery at the tip of the upper earlobe, a little above the horn of the head, and on another temple, the length of which should be according to the length of the small finger, and then place your hand with the cautery until half the thickness of the skin is burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cautery, which is a type of surgical knife, the shape of which has been previously described.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	But however more subtle it is than that somewhat as you see; and there must be a reduction in its excessive thickness somewhat.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with what has been previously prepared until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	Of the cautery of ancient apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is chronic and you have treated it with the methods we mentioned but your medication does not agree and the patient has no fever, then cauterize that area with four cauteries: on all the corners of their head; and with one cautery in the middle of the head as we have said; and with a cautery at the nape of the neck.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the method of the cautery is done according to what has been said above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it has already been cauterized around the mouth of the stomach; and more behind; then it should be treated with whatever process you use.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	On cauterization for forgetfulness caused by flames.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	At the beginning, the patient should be given large jars and pills that purify the seed (referring to semen or reproductive essence).
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	Then shave the entire head of the patient and apply a plaster made of cerate (a type of ointment) on the nape of their neck, as described in the treatise on plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And apply that several times, for that is a method of cautery.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do this according to that doctor's order which I have already mentioned.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And thus if that healing is good; and if not, then apply three cauteries to the lower part of his head, which should be descending from the highest part of the head down towards the part closest to the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And leave the width of one thick finger between each cautery, and then treat the cautery as has been described.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	But if you add more and the patient can tolerate it, then apply a cautery to the middle area; and if you want to increase it further, now cauterize the area over both sides (corns).
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Then treat that area until it is healed; and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to the form previously given.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On the cautery of the paralysis and the soothing of the entire body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	You should proceed with the soothing of the head using jars and as we have said; then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize it with a cautery in the middle of the head, and with a cautery over all the sides of the head, and with a cautery on the lower part of it, and with three cauteries over the vertebrae of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the disease of excessive softening of the body and the patients tolerate it and the disease is severe, then cauterize that area with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and ultimately with a cautery inside where the spine ends, and lift your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And then treat that which needs healing, and this should be done with an olive cautery.
Capitol .x.	It seems like you've provided a section or chapter heading, "Capitul .x.", which likely translates to "Chapter 10" in English. Without additional context or text to follow this header, I can only infer that this indicates the start of Chapter 10 in whatever document or manuscript you are referring to. If you have more text from this chapter that needs translation or interpretation, feel free to share!
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	On the cautery for epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	The epileptic is not cauterized unless the epilepsy is due to phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And thus, you should purify the brain of the patient at the beginning with herbs and with the other treatment that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is severe and can tolerate the exception of the medicines. 
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who cannot tolerate the medicines, then administer small doses and have the servant grind them, for several days beforehand, with an improvement in the foods.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize that area with a cautery in the middle of the head according to the previous method, and with another cautery on the back of the head, and on each temple of the head cauterize as well.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize that area with the cauteries I have mentioned, having paralysis and softening of the body over the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And let it be an olive cautery according to what is preceding.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is a child, then use a gentle cautery according to this method.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On the cauterization for melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humors and thick phlegm, then cauterize that area with the cauteries we have mentioned to induce paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is an excess that turns to melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give them something to drink that purifies their brain according to what has been previously stated in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And then shave the head of the patient, and then make a properly formed circle on top of it, and then place that in the middle of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And the patient should be laid down, and held from all sides.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	Then apply an ointment; it is better to use lamb's fat.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And warm that over the fire with moderate heating, which the aforementioned should endure when it is placed on him.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	Then place that at the top of his head in the circle, and leave it inside so that it is rubbed thoroughly.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do this with the patient once a week for the entire duration until he is healed, following other good practices; or if you prefer, cauterize that area by making small points according to the highest part of it, but ensure your hand holds the cautery as directed: this type of cautery moistens the brain equally.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	Then place that piece wrapped in fat or in goose grease.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On the cautery of water descending into the eye.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When it is declared that water begins in the head by the signs which I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give to the patient something that purifies his head, and protect it from all moisture.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And have that person sweat in a bath with decoctions for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And then command him to shave his head, and cauterize that spot with a cautery in the middle of the head; and then cauterize that area with two cauteries on both temples if it is the beginning of a water-like discharge from both eyes, or from one side if it starts from one eye.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	And with the cautery, incise all the veins and arteries that are beneath the chain; and let the cauteries be placed at that length along the latitude of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And beware of blood flow when it is being cauterized; and if you see any blood flow, stop it using some medicine, whichever is available to you.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And come with the wisdom that is in the extraction of arteries and the cutting off of those, along with caution regarding blood flow.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And sometimes it is cauterized on the neck below two bones with two backward-facing cauteries.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	On the cauterization of old tears (or chronic tear duct issues).
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears of the eyes are chronically slow and through the veins and arteries which are in the visible part of the head outside, and it is confirmed that this is cold superfluous phlegmatic fluid, then cauterize that with a cautery which we have described in the chapter on the beginning of water dripping into the eyes, and with a cautery in the middle of the head, and with two cauterizations on both temples, and with two cauterizations on both sides of the neck.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if additional treatment is needed, then cauterize that on the entire side of the eye socket above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	On the cauterization for nasal odor.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat this condition with what we have said in the division and your treatment does not improve, then prepare and give the patient crushed cochi (a type of herb) to drink for three nights; then shave the head, and cauterize it with a medium-sized olive wood cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	Then cauterize that with a carnation cautery, placing two cauterizations above the eyebrows, slightly away from the hair.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And be careful of the artery so that you do not burn it.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And this is the form of the claw-shaped cautery.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On the cautery for softening the eyelids of wounds.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the eye is softened by disease or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with this lunar cautery; and this is its form:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you cauterize that area, do so above both eyebrows with two small cauteries in each part, and extend them towards the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the size of the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard with your hand using the cautery, but rather to the extent that one-third of the eyelid is adhered.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	On the cautery of the eyelid when the hairs turn inward and pierce the eye.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hairs of the nose are converted into parts inside such that they pierce the nose, cautery is performed in those areas in two ways, for cautery can be done either with iron or with burning medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If with the cautery of fire, command the patient before this to shave their hairs as those who clean do, until they are long and smooth; and if you must, pluck them from their roots, then hold the skin tight with a bandage so that it is not wrinkled until the hairs have grown back.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Therefore, when they are born and cleansed, then place the head of the patient in your lap, and then mark on the eyelids of their eyes with a sign, which is according to the shape of a walnut leaf, and let the beginning of the sign be near the hair.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	Then place something soaked in egg white or in a poultice of flour on the eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	Then ignite the cautery, which has this shape.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	Then cauterize over the figure you have marked, little by little, in successive spots, until the surface of the chain, which is like a myrtle leaf, is thoroughly burned and properly visible.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	The sign of the healthiness of your work is that you see the eyelid already contracted and the hairs of it raised due to the puncture of the eye.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	Then raise your hand and leave it for three days, and then place something on it with bandages until the scar is healed.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with an ointment until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	And if any cause returns through the hairs near their roots and the eyelid is softened, then apply the cautery again on that area just as you did initially.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	But if the hairs are on the eyelid, then cauterize that area until it is raised to its natural position and smoothed out so that the hairs do not irritate the eye.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But the cautery with burning medicine commands the patient to pluck the hairs until they are elongated and smoothed out, and then make a form of mithra leaf from linen cloth.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And then take soap known to be effective and one uncia of live coals, or as much as needed, and thoroughly mix those ingredients quickly so that they are not cooled; then spread this mixture over the cloth that is made in the shape of a mithra leaf, and place it on one eye or both; and place the eye lightly covered in egg white, and the patient's head should be kept still.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And place the finger on the medicine and press it slightly and do not remove your hand until the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for the bite is in him as if it were fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And thus when you perceive that the swelling is due to a bite, now apply the medicine and remove it with your finger; then when the biting sensation stops, now remove the medicine and wash the wound with water; and now consider if the eyelid has already been lifted as it should be washed, then remove the constriction with fire or with an incision, because now it is well; and if not, return to applying the medicine on the area where it did not stick and does not darken until your operation is completed and the wound contracts.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	Then place on the wound with bandages until the chain of adhesion is removed, and then treat it with an unguent or another remedy until it heals.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you to carefully guard your operation so that no residue of the medicine falls into the wound. If the eyelid becomes softened after several days and any hair causes irritation in the wound, now reapply your medicine on the area where the eyelid has become softened, just as you did at the beginning, and then bandage it until it heals.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the form of the mirtle leaf.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And know that the veins of men are diverse according to their magnitude and smallness, and thus according to this your treatment is made. 
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And the method should not be hidden from one who studies this art.
Capitol .xvii.	It seems like you've provided a chapter or section marker, specifically "Capitul .xvii." which translates to "Chapter XVII" in English. This indicates the start of Chapter Seventeen in a text. If you have any specific content from this chapter that needs translation or explanation, feel free to share it!
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On the cauterization of a fistula that is in the lacrimal duct of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula with what we have said in the divisions of diseases and your treatment does not work, then it is necessary that you cauterize it according to this method: command the patient to place his head on your shoulder, and hold the patient's head between your hands in such a way that it is neither strained nor agitated by their own head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	Then place some lint in an egg white or on a poultice of lint over the wound.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then ignite the cautery, which is of this shape:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which should be hollow, like the shape of a reed or a vulture's feather, at one end with which the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you wish, it can penetrate through to the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want, it should come out like a probe.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	However, the one that is concave is better for your work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And then press the fistula if it is open, and draw out the pus and dry that area.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And then place on it the cautery which is well ignited, and hold that with your hand a little distance from the nostril at the part of the nose, so that your hand does not tremble or disturb the patient, and then place the cautery in the gray area of the nostril and corrupt that area.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And if at the beginning of your cautery you penetrate into the bone, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice, as needed; and leave it like that for three days, and then place on that wound a bandage and surround it with a drying ointment until it is healed.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	But if ten days have passed and it is not healed, then apply a sharp corrosive medicine to it until the bone is exposed and scrape it as you deem appropriate in your treatment.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And there is another method of cautery for a fistula which some earlier practitioners said: insert into the site of the fistula and open it, then place in that fissure a thin wire shaped like it; pour into that the quantity of one inch of molten lead; hold the wire firmly with your hand so that the patient is not upset and the molten lead does not reach beyond that area; you must place over the patient’s wound a cloth soaked in egg white or water, for the lead adheres to the site of the fistula and heals it through marvelous healing.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cauterization and treatment, that is good; but if not, then it is necessary to administer a probe into the nose and reduce the fistula to the interior of the nose according to where it will come to its proper place.
Capitol .xviii.	It seems like you've provided a chapter or section heading from a text, specifically "Capitol .xviii." This indicates the eighteenth chapter or section of whatever document it is from. Without additional context or content from this chapter, I can't provide further details or translation. If you have specific lines or paragraphs from this chapter that need translating or explaining, please provide them!
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	This phrase appears to be in an archaic or medieval language that is a mix of Latin and Romance languages. Here's the translation into English:
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	When white motes cause裂隙在嘴唇上出现，特别是在儿童的嘴唇上。
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, when you treat those cracks using what we have said in the divisions and your treatment does not improve, then apply a small knife-shaped cautery according to this form that is shown:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And let the cavity be adjusted according to the delicacy of that area. 
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	And then place that heated instrument carefully in those fissures until the cautery reaches the bottom of the fissures.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with ointment until it heals.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On the cautery of a fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When an abscess develops at the base of the uvula or on the palate or around the roots of the teeth, and it then suppurates, and subsequently breaks open, and becomes chronic, with pus flowing and a fistula forming, and when you treat it and it does not respond well to healing, then you must heat a cautery according to the size received in the fistula. Then place that heated iron into the tract of the fistula, holding your hand so that the hot iron reaches the bottom of it; this is done once or twice at the end. And then treat it with what we have mentioned for the healing until it heals.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And if the slough is separated and healing occurs, that is good; but if not, then it is necessary to expose the area and remove the corrupted bone as will be detailed in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Capitol .xx.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	Of cautery of the teeth and softening of the veins.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the veins are softened by moisture and the teeth are painful, and you treat those with medicines but they do not respond, then place the head of the patient on your knee, and next apply the cautery which will come close to this: in such a way that you place the tube over the tooth and quickly insert the ignited cautery into it, and keep your hand slightly inside so that the patient feels the heat of the fire reach the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And then lift your hand, and then repeat the cautery several times as you wish.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And then the patient should rinse his mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, and afterward spit it out, for the painful tooth is fixed, the softened gum is strengthened, and the corrupted moisture is dried.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On the cautery for toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is caused by cold, or if it is cold or swollen, or if the treatment with medicine does not work, then apply cautery in two ways: either use cow dung for cautery, or use fire for cautery.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Here is the translation of the provided text line by line:
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then repeat that several times until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you wish, soak wool or cloth in the aforementioned solution, place that on the painful tooth, and place a heated iron over it until the heat reaches the core of the tooth's cavity.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, when using cautery with fire, you should pay attention to the size of the pipe or iron, and it should be somewhat thick so that the sharpness of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then heat the cautery to the desired shape, place it on the tooth, and hold it until the cautery is cooled; do this several times as long as the pain persists, whether on that day or the next day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And it is necessary that, due to the application of that cautery, the patient fills their mouth with a good solution and holds it for an hour, then rinse it out; this is the form of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize whichever extremity you wish according to what is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the form of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	Capitol .xxii.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	From the cauterization of extrophy.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When the swellings are of phlegm and cold humors and do not obey digestion through medicines and you wish to digest those lightly, then light a cautery with the shape described hereafter, having two hooked ends for the smoke to escape from one end, and place that heated cautery once on the swelling, and again if necessary, until it reaches the core of the swelling.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the swelling is small, then place the cautery according to the size of the swelling, and afterward leave it for three days and place over it a piece of cloth until what the fire has burned is removed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	Then treat it with ointment, bandages, and cloths until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the shape of the cannula or such a cautery is as follows.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On the cautery for hoarseness of voice and constriction of the windpipe.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When the humidities come upon the canal of the lung, and especially when this is due to cold constitution, then it is necessary that the patient be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that area by placing the cautery on the throat in the affected spot.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And be careful that you do not penetrate too deeply with the cautery into the groin, nor burn more than a little of the patient's tendon.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize that area with another cautery at the joint of the neck at the last vertebra of the patient.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And the cautery of it should be done carefully following the previous method.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Then treat that area with the aforementioned method until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On the cauterization for lung disease and cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung disease are caused by infiltrating humidity, and the patient does not have fever or tuberculosis and the illness is old, then cauterize that area with two cauteries on the collarbone at the points near the lungs; and with another cautery in the middle of the foot between the two mamillary points; and let the cautery be done carefully according to the previous form.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, let your cauterization be done with points using the cautery that is called "puncta," the form of which precedes in the point cauterization for ear pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And make points between those joints; then treat that with whatever method you use until it is healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And here is the translation of the given sentence:
Capitol .xxv.	Capitol .xxv.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	Of cautery of a twitch that is at the head of the helpers.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the joint is dislocated due to lubricating humidity and is not fixed at the time of its return, you should put its dislocation back in place before it gets used to returning that way, and then with a small movement it can be displaced so that it comes out, as we have testified. Therefore, first reduce the dislocation, and then lay the patient on their back or on their side; and then lift the tendon which is inside the joint towards the upper parts with your left hand fingers, if the joint is dislocated inwardly.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then heat the cautery that has two heads; and this is its form:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the tendon before it penetrates into the other side; and the figure of the cautery will come to have four heads.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And thus those subtle parts depend on the amount of tension; and this is its form:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And sometimes it is adjusted according to this method, and that is why the cauteries are eight.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then place the cautery on the wounds with salt, and then ensure that the patient remains at rest, and the limb should not be moved for some time until it is healed.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is in the upper parts and this has occurred, then cauterize over the muscle with a chisel-shaped cautery or with multiple pointed cauters, because the joint is confirmed, the humidity is removed, and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On cauterization of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When cold and motes of humidity enter the stomach, causing it to exceed its natural composition and multiply phlegms in it, and if you continue the methods of treatment without confirming them, then the patient must lie on their back with their arms and legs extended. Then cauterize that area with three cauteries: place one chisel-shaped cautery under the feet at a distance of one finger, and two cauteries beside each side of it so that the shape of a triangular cautery is formed; ensure there is space between them so they do not touch to cause ulceration.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is two-thirds the thickness of the chain.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And the shape of the cautery should be according to this form with an addition, And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle part of the stomach according to this form; and this should be a cautery according to the circular form as follows:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And let the stomach be punctured and cautery applied to those who are frightened by this cautery: it is that you feel over the stomach with points according to the amount you wish with a probe, and then cauterize those points with a cautery; and then treat that area with the treatment that precedes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	On the cauterization of cold spleen.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When pain in the spleen occurs due to cold or moisture or by excessive wind that deviates from its normal composition and is expelled through superfluous discharge, and if the patient is treated with what we have said but does not improve, then the patient should be made to lie on their back, and you feel over the spleen with a probe and mark three cautery points according to this form and in this quantity just above the spleen below the hypochondria, taking care of the position of the body.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of the digit, and let the cautery be according to the length of the body straight. 
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not touch your skin with the moving cautery.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the quantity of that which is added equals half the weight of the chain, and it is not adjusted further; and if the patient stands on their feet; and if they are not standing, then let them lie down, with their limbs already extended, and raise their arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is possible for you to cauterize these areas with a knife-shaped cautery, when you apply subtlety and prudence in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And be careful not to proceed too much in the cauterization, and attach the weight of the entire chain so that it affects the whole body and penetrates into the intestines, for the chain here is subtle; and you should know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On the puncturing of an abscess in the liver with a cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When there is an excrescence or abscess in the liver and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the liver or in its membrane, then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the patient will experience heaviness and sharp pain.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the membrane of the spleen, where the pain is greatly intensified and often doctors are fatigued by its cure.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, the patient must be turned over on their stomach; then cover the area of the abscess with cloth; and then heat the cautery which is shaped like a rod, the form of which was described on the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize with that rod-shaped cautery until the entire chain is burned, until it reaches the hip, so that pus comes out.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	Then treat that area with the treatment for other abscesses until it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And this form of cautery should only be used by those whose study in the art of medicine is extensive, and who have knowledge of many diseases; however, one might occasionally dare to attempt this operation with experience, but it is better to leave it to those who are skilled.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On the cauterization of pleurisy.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	The ancients said that cauterization of pleurisy using the root of aristology (likely a mistranslation or archaic term) was effective when done in this manner: take a piece of the dried root of aristology as long as you can find, and let it be as thick as a finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then submerge it in oil and heat it over the fire, and then cauterize that area with a cautery where the collarbone meets the neck; and with two small cauters guide them slightly downward towards the part below the beard, and with two cauters at the spot declining between the fifth rib and the spine, tilting slightly toward the back regions; and with another cautery in the middle of the foot; and with another on the stomach, and with three cauters on the back regions; and with one cautery in that area where the two shoulders meet, and with two cauters from both sides of the foot, leaving the cautery between the two shoulders untouched.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And you should not apply the cautery with your hand on the明显处工作，而是应该在链条的表面进行。(Note: The last part of the translation is a bit unclear due to the somewhat ambiguous nature of the source text. A more literal but less coherent translation would be: "And it is not necessary that you grasp the cautery with your hand, rather on the manifest of the chain at work.") 
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And the ancients already said that among those men who use a cautery of iron resembling a ray and heat it up, and place it in the location between the ribs, until they reach that abscess and dried pus, just as we have said regarding the abscess of the liver.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	But in this perforation with a cautery there is no fear, for one dies as soon as it happens at the site of the fistula which cannot be healed.
Capitol .xxx.	Capitol .xxx.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Of the cautery of the armpit.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat the disease of the armpit with what we have said about the treatment in the division and do not agree with your cure, then cautery should be applied in three ways, all of which are correct. One of these methods is to make three or four linear cauteries along the length of the armpit according to the shape of the flank cauteries, whose figure has preceded.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And there should be the thickness of a finger or a little more between each cautery, and the method of the cautery should be the same method we have mentioned for the flank cautery.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not move your hand during the cautery; and the patient should lie on their back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And another method of cautery is to ignite the cautery strongly twice, the reason for which we have mentioned in the chapter on muscle dislocation, and lift the ligament that is in the line of the armpit according to the position of the left-lying patient.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And let your elevation be such that you lift the chain according to the length of the body, so that cauterizations can be made according to the width of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then insert the two burning ends, lit with fire, into that area where you penetrate the chain from the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then remove the cautery; thus, four cauterizations have been made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you wish, cauterize using a cautery with three burning points.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then you treat the cautery after it has stopped bleeding for several days, because it is more comfortable than other preceding causes in the treatment. 
Capitol .xxxi.	Capitol .xxxi.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	Of the cautery of dropsy.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you treat the dropsy with the methods of cure which we have mentioned in the division and do not achieve your treatment, then it is necessary that you cauterize with four cauteries around the navel and one cautery on the stomach, and another cautery on the liver, and another cautery on the spleen, and two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and one cautery in the center of the foot, and another cautery on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the depth of the cautery should be proportional to the severity of the condition.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	Then leave the cautery open so that it burns for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the patient's treatment by simply using cautery because it is necessary for two intentions to be added to it, and thus it will quickly aid in their recovery.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery with which the abdomen is cauterized should be key-shaped, according to the form described previously, and the shape of the cautery with which the back is cauterized should be olive-shaped, according to its previous description.
Capitol .xxxii.	Capitol .xxxii.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	From the cautery of feet and the thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are inflamed with dropsy and filled with watery fluid, you must cauterize the feet on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring finger, lift your hand with the cautery without twisting it; then raise your hand, but do not completely return it, for the watery fluid will ooze out.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The cautery should be in this form: Then make two cauteries on both thighs, and on each thigh a cautery should be made with the blade end of the knife-shaped cautery.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And the cautery should be according to the length of the thigh: place one at the top and the other at the middle of the thigh; and on each thigh, two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And leave the wound open for a long time so that some fluid can ooze out of it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	Then treat it with those causes which we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On the cautery of the abdominal area.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the abdomen is weakened by cold and moisture inside it that debilitates its virtues, which are digestive and retentive powers found in the stomach and intestines, this condition is treated with healing methods and not conferring [meaning avoiding certain actions], and sometimes patients undergo cautery to display these virtues; then cauterize that area with a large cautery over their stomach according to what has preceded in the stomach's cautery process, using a circular cautery and four circumferential fine cauteries around the navel, with a fine nail-shaped cautery; and also apply a cautery on the alcatin [a medieval term for a part of the abdomen] over alozis gran [possibly referring to a specific point or condition], or use two cauterizations.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if you need to remove excessive moisture and the patient can tolerate it, then cauterize that area on the pentenilh [a medieval term, possibly referring to a specific part of the body] and on the intestines, strengthening them by applying two cauteries over the stomach and near the inguinal areas, for this is a perfect cure that does not fail.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On the cautery of old hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When it is in the nature of ancient hemorrhoids or thick humors that infiltrate or corrupted humidities, and they are treated with what we have said in the division and your treatment does not agree, then cauterize with three cauteries over the pus from the lower vertebrae and small triangular areas, and with a cautery above the navel by two fingers.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you think that the stomach of the patient is chilled and their food is not digested, and their face becomes inflamed, then cauterize over the stomach with a large cautery as previously mentioned; and with one cautery over the spleen, and another cautery over the liver using a nail-shaped cautery, and leave the cauteries open for some time, and then treat internally to heal them.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	On the cauterization of the armpit before the amputation of the arm.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you amputate the armpit, then ignite the cautery that resembles a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then insert the ignited cautery into the amputated armpit, and guide your hand until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do this once or twice, for if they are too numerous, then cauterize each one as we have recounted, and subsequently treat them with ointments until they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery on any part, it is more effective in healing.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Capitol .xxxvi.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	Of the cauterization of fistulas that are formed naturally in the regions of the body.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the work which we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by that, it should be healed with a cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when someone has an old fistula in the natural rear area, and it discharges pus and corrupted moisture, then what is most appropriate to do is to probe that with a thin needle, and then determine the depth of it using the aforementioned needle.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	And ignite the cautery that resembles a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	Then place the ignited cautery into this fistula, according to the extent to which you test it.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeat the application of the cautery inside until those corrupted tissues are burned, once or two or three times, according to the extent of your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And be careful not to burn the nerves and veins; or if the fistula leads to the body of the bladder or to the intestine, then be cautious of all those areas; and do not perform this unless the fistula is in a fleshy area and you think it is not penetrating.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Then treat the area inside until it heals.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the area is sealed and the materials are separated from it, and remain thus for a long time, then you know that it is entirely cured.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the materials are not removed from it, then you know that it is penetrating or into the marrow of the corrupted bone, or this comes from those causes which will bring a recurrence in its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Capitol .xxxvii.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	Of the cauterization of hemorrhoids.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When hemorrhoids cause pain due to cold or excessive wind (gas), and thus the patient's life is disturbed, then you must cauterize that area over the hemorrhoids with a cautery, applying a nail-shaped cautery specifically to each hemorrhoid.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And strongly cauterize them with a slight gap between each one, so that three linear cauteries will result, and thus they will be more effective in healing.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On the cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When you encounter weakness and softening of the bladder due to cold and moisture such that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize in the area slightly above the bladder where the pubic hair begins. Cauterize with one cautery on the right side and another on the left side of it.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the number of the patient's fingers; and cauterize that area with a cautery on the lower part of the back, or with two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And let the cautery be in the shape of a claw as it is processed. 
Capitol .xxxix.	Capitol .xxxix.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Of the cauterization of the thigh.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When cold and humidity come to the thigh, and because of this impregnation is prohibited, and their menstrual cycles are corrupted, and the provocation of them is delayed, and you experience pain due to the occurrence of them, then it is necessary that the area be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder; and with a cautery over the most affected spot below the thighs, or with two cauteries, and let the cautery be made with a clavilh [a type of instrument used for cautery].
Capitol .xl.	Chapter XL.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When cold and moist humors are poured into the area of the ankle, and these become causes for its displacement from its proper place, a sign of this is that one thigh appears lengthened when compared to the other.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the location of the dislocation is found where there is pain.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then it is necessary to cauterize the patient on the area of the ankle with a circular cautery, after you have marked the area with your finger around the dislocated part as it has turned, and in such a way that the dislocation falls at the center of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And let it be the cautery with which you precede the form in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize that area with three large olive wood cauteries.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And let the cautery be done according to the extent of the spread throughout the entire chain; and then treat that which needs healing.
Capitol .xli.	Capitol .xli.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	Of the cautery of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain comes to the upper part, and is caused by cold and moisture, the patient is treated as we have said and do not disagree, which is outdated. Now it is necessary that you relieve the patient of gross humors with foul pills or artificial pills or similar ones; then cauterize that area.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the method of cautery in this case is according to two methods: either cautery with burning medicines, or cautery with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	It follows according to two known methods, of which one is to cauterize that area on the broad part of it with three triangular cauteries in this form; and make with those a good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And the space between each cautery should be the quantity of the thickness of a finger, and the cautery should be olive or grain-shaped.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	At other times, the cautery should be placed on the middle spot or at the head of the ankle, making four cauteries.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, cauterize with a circle, which precedes the form in the cautery of the dislocation of the ankle, where the circle should contain and burn the entire length of the tendon.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the method of cautery for gout when pain is attached to the ankle and does not extend into the thigh.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cautery is knife-like, and the depth of the cautery should be according to the amount of protrusion of the chain.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the patient reports that the pain is spread around the area near the toes of the foot, then cauterize that area with a cautery at three points or four or more if you deem it necessary.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the patient reports that the pain extends down to the thigh, then cauterize that area using a knife-shaped cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And be careful in any cauterization that you do not use the cautery so intensely that you burn nerves or large arteries, and thereby cause harm or contraction to the patient.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have seen some who cauterized the ankle and were too intense in the cauterization, causing the burning heat to swell inside until the inflammation reached the foot, and the heat penetrated and corrupted the entire foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And then a strong discharge from the stomach occurs, and consequently, death may follow.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two separate areas, cauterize each one according to this method.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise have described a particular cautery for cauterization, which is made in this way: make a circle of iron with a circumference of about half a palm; and let its opening be the size of a date seed or slightly smaller.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And within that circle is another third; and the space between them should be equal to the size of a pea; and those circles should be opened on two sides; and the length of those rods should be one or two inches, and make proper iron attachments around the edges in the circles; and this is the form of it:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	And it should be ignited in the fire until it turns red and sparks, and then it should be placed on the affected area of the ankle, with the patient lying on their side.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And thus cauterize that area with three round cauteries at once.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then leave that for three days; then treat that with a plaster and keep the wound open for several days; then cure that with ointments until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Dyss Albucasis: oh, sons, of this kind of cautery we have used little due to the fear of its appearance, and because few have found it to be worthy of consideration.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	But with good cauteries to those who have endured them, and find the affected area through that.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	But with cauteries attached to medicines, you should make two circles using a perforated armula similar to the keyhole of an iron door; the length of the walls should be about two nuts or keys in size.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space between each of the quantities is equal to the thickness of a finger; and there should be one below and one above, and they should be arranged in this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And then place your hand over the patient's ankle as they lie on their side, and press your hand firmly over the area of the ankle; then take warm water and pour it between two circles, ensuring that the warmth is brought close to the fire gradually little by little, and keep this treatment for about an hour, allowing the patient to endure both the burning sensation and the adjustment — because this method causes a burning similar to that of fire — until the burning subsides.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then lift your hand with the instrument and clean the entire ankle with warm water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then leave it for three days and place your hand on the swollen area until the blackness from the burning is gone, and let it be like this for several more days, during which pus will drain out; this is the final stage of healing.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain extends to the thigh or the abdomen, treat it in the same way as you would for the ankle, by placing it in water as described previously.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the method of hot water, and I have already written about that in the treatise on the refinement of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Take alkali and unextinguished lime in equal parts, grind them together, and place them in a new vessel of which the bottom should be pierced with a small hole according to the amount that can fit inside.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And place the bottom of the vessel over another glazed vessel, and pour soft water over the alkali and live lime in such a quantity that it covers them by one finger's depth. Then compress them with your hand for good pressure, and let the hot water that drains through flow into the pierced part of the glazed vessel below.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then concentrate all that water and pour it over more fresh lime and alkali because the liquid will now have strong acidity. This is used in many medical procedures and in the cauterization of other body parts, as this procedure has a fiery effect.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And for some medicines with which a broad area is cauterized, such as tezizic and mel anacrat mixed together with lime and soap.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Gaulia recounts an operation and cure performed by one of the ancients for curing ankle pain and sciatica, and he magnificently describes how effective it was, saying that no other treatment is necessary, and that once treated in this manner, as he recommends, it cures completely without further intervention.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it is that fresh vetch should be taken, and if vetch is not found, a recent fig should be taken; and it should be crushed with a little grease and placed on the ankle where there is pain, or on the thigh, or on the chest, and it should be bandaged.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And it should be left for a quantity of three hours or for the amount of time that the patient feels relief from the adjustment.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then place him in a bath and when his body is warmed, immerse him in the sun, for the pain ceases and he is healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that it is not necessary for anyone to use cautery with these medicines until the body is purged.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	But Escorides says that when the vein is cauterized with a goat's horn, it greatly benefits him; and the cautery should be applied in this second manner: wool should be soaked in old oil and placed between the toes of the foot and the stone.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And then take dried goat's horn and ignite it with fire until it turns into charcoal; then place it on the wool and heat it until it spreads.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And then repeat this process, and do not stop until the sting of the bite reaches the ankle and the pain is relieved.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this method of cautery is called cattle cautery.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	From the cautery of foot pain.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cautery is only applied in this single condition which is caused by an effusion of cold matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, after evacuating the patient with fitting pills and similar ones, which are made on the back where the pain is, three lines according to the width of it, using ten cauteries or more in each line, depending on the tolerance of the patient and their strength.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And the cautery should be done with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, cauterize with three or four cauteries using a median claw-shaped cautery in the following manner:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XLIII.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On cautery at the onset of rheumatism.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	This disease often appears in small children; and the sign of its onset in children is that it affects their structure, causing elevation and movement in the eyes. 
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And you will find in the lowermost vertebra of the spine and of the bones of the tail that it begins to protrude over the other vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And therefore when you see this and wish to prevent it, then cauterize that area with a circular cautery according to this form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	and apply the cautery evenly over all parts of the vertebra.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you wish, cauterize around the circumference of the vertebra with a pointed cautery, making two lines or three.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And let the points be close to each other.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	Then treat the area until it heals using the methods we have described.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	But be careful not to apply the cautery in cases of swelling caused by nerve spasms.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On the cautery treatment for gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And therefore when gout caused by cold is treated with a method of cure and the pains are not alleviated, then they should be treated with cautery.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And it is that you cauterize that area near the evacuation in the circle of the joint of the foot with multiple cauteries.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And it is an olive-shaped cautery, of which this is the form:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pain rises into the tendons or other joints, and this often happens, then cauterize each tendon with three or four cauteries all around using this olive-shaped cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if more cauteries than these are necessary for you, then cauterize accordingly but do not press your hand too hard with the cautery beforehand; just enough around the size of a chain link.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pain rises into the tendon and bone, then apply the cautery that we have described in its chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pain is in the hands alone, and it is called suagra (possibly referring to a type of swelling or arthritis), then puncture around the fingers as they curve, along those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pain remains in the hands, then puncture around the fingers on each knuckle and along the palm of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pains approach after several days in the joints or muscles, then cauterize them all around with the help of instruments.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not evacuate the patient without proper treatment and reception of medicines, for if good treatment is administered and phlegm is evacuated with this cautery, they will be healed, God helps.
Capitol .xlv.	Capitol .xlv.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	Of the cauterization of wounds.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When there is a wound in the knee area and the intestines are protruding before the hernia at the groin, and this condition begins to worsen, then you must order the patient to leave their food for that day and use laxative causes so that the waste leaves from their abdomen.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	Then hold the patient between your hands on their back, and command them to keep their leg inside until it is healed or the hernia or intestines no longer appear. 
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And then return it with your fingers and carefully examine the rupture over the bone of the ankle, marking the end which should resemble half of a circle on the lower parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then heat the cautery of which this is the form:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	Until it becomes red hot and gives off sparks.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and then place your hand over the area so that the intestine does not come out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them, with one servant on their chest, another on their legs, who holds their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And then place the cautery on that mark with your hand, holding the cautery straight, and do so until you reach the bone of the finger within the middle joint; repeat with that another time if you have not succeeded in reaching the bone in the first attempt.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And carefully observe the condition of the intestine during your cautery, so that you do not burn it, which could cause death or another serious harm to the patient.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your operation is not successful.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And it is necessary that the cautery for children be subtle according to their size and measure.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And then treat the area of the cautery for three days with ointment until the scar from the fire is healed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that area with other ointments until it is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient should lie on their back for forty days until the area and the wound are fully healed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And it is necessary to regulate the patient's diet according to the length of their healing time, so that their stomach diminishes, and to prevent the intestine from coming out due to the effort of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And then, when it is time to remove [the treatment] after forty days, administer a properly prepared medicine, and let the patient take it for another forty days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And let the patient reduce work and overindulgence in food and drink, and loud voices, for when one follows this regimen of complete healing, they will be healed.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And I will speak of the treatment for ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and at the beginning, and if they do not want to heal, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size, and let what is protruding from the wound be about one-third of it; then treat that as we have said, and it should not be tightened.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And some of the first ones have already said that a rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, since it is marked out with a probe.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And a line is placed horizontally across the upper part of the rupture, and another line above it; then place your hand with a claw cautery, but the first cautery should be lighter and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLVI.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	On the cauterization of sprains.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain occurs in the limbs due to a fall or percussion and that pain persists for a long time and does not improve with medical treatments, then it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And let the cautery be applied to the entire limb according to its size and smallness, and its strength and weakness, and the location of the twist and pain in it.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Therefore, if it is healed by the first cautery, that is good; and if not, then apply the cautery again to it; for it is customary with those pains to puncture the limb near the affected area, because you must achieve this with a cautery before the patient is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	On the cautery of leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Some lepers see great benefit from being treated with cautery, especially if the type of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of blood and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And when you want to cauterize the patient, consider if the leprosy is common and can be cured with what we have said in the division and does not remain, and fear that the corruption may spread throughout the body and all its composition, then cauterize the patient on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and the second slightly below it, at the forehead where the hair ends; two on both temples; and one behind, on the nape or neck.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And place your hand with the cautery slightly inside so that it presses on the bone slightly, and from there displace the scales, so that the expiration of large vapors is alleviated in them; and cauterize on the thigh as necessary.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if leprosy has already spread over the patient and appears manifestly, then you must cauterize those areas with the cauteries which we have mentioned above; and with a cautery on the tip of the nose, and with two cauteries on both cheeks, and with two cauteries on two vertebrae of the neck, and with six cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and with one large cautery on the vertebrae near the hip, and one on the ribs, and with two on the knees, and one on each knee, and with two on the elbows and one on each elbow joint, and with two on the hips, and with two on the thighs, and with two on the tendons of his foot; cauterize those areas over all the joints of his fingers and toes, and on each heel of his feet, and on the armpits.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And be careful of the nerves that are on the heel so as not to burn those.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And sometimes it is cauterized with a cautery on the bone of the hip and with another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the spleen.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more you adjust the cauteries, the more beneficial and effective it is; and know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery, just as they do not feel it on their skin, because the body of the patient is already numbed.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And it is necessary that the cauteries be large or few according to the members and the joints, depending on the specifications of the tools.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then treat the cautery with flour of iris mixed with honey and with other treatments until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On the Cauterization of Stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When any member is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and it does not heal, then you should cauterize that numbed member with cauteries according to the size of the member or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let your cautery enter the opening of the wound a little.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then treat it with an ointment that will heal it.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And sometimes a cautery is applied to a numb area that affects the hands and feet, and the vertebrae of the back, in order to clear the discharge of nerves which move that limb, and the numbness is reduced.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	But do not presume on this unless one is knowledgeable in the anatomy of the limbs and the distribution of nerves that move throughout the body.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLIX.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On the cautery of ulcers that are malignant.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When an ulcer is old and does not respond to any of the medicinal ointments, then you should apply a cautery over it with a hot iron slightly according to the size of the wound, so that the whiteness and discoloration are reduced, and its color changes.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	Then treat it with flour of ashes and lentils mixed with olive oil and rose leaves, and with the blood of a dove or pigeon, where each is one part and all are mixed together. Then spread this mixture on a cloth and place it over the area until it heals.
Capitol .l.	The text provided seems to be in an old Romance language that combines elements of Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. However, the given line "Capitul .l." appears to be a section or chapter heading rather than part of the treatise itself. It likely means:
De cauterizacio de cranc.	Of the cauterization of the neck.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer begins and you wish to remove it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery around it just as it appears.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise say that it should be cauterized with the latter cautery in the middle place; but I have not seen this, for I fear that it may become ulcerated, and I have already seen this happen several times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is better that it be cauterized around it with a circle as we have said, or with multiple cauteries.
Capitol .li.	Chapter II. 
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	From the context provided by your example translations, it seems that the language is a mixture of medieval Latin and Romance languages. Given this, let's attempt a translation for the given line:
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When some wound is delayed in maturation, and this is due to excess moisture or the condition of the patient, who is old and frail, with little blood, or by time, and you want to hasten the maturation of the wound; then cauterize around it using small cautery points; and afterwards leave it so that it will mature faster.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	And if you want to perforate it with a cautery, then heat the cautery, which has this shape: and place it in the middle of the wound until the tip penetrates.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery in that spot where the pus is left causes the arm's flesh to be relieved; then treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter II.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	On the cauterization of corrosive agents.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrosive agent is a moving corruption in the limb, which corrodes it as fire consumes dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you find the corrosive agent in a place that can tolerate cautery with fire, then heat a few small, and large enough nails for cautery, according to what is appropriate in the place where the corrosion is.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then cauterize that area entirely until you eliminate all corrosion and leave no cause of it behind.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And then leave that for three days, and place over the cauterized areas a dressing mixed with oil until all the scars are completely removed and all the corruption is gone.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And then treat that with flesh-generating ointments.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	But if after three days you see that the flesh grows healthy with no corruption, good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on those areas that are damaged and corrupted.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And corrosive areas should be treated several times with sharp medicine, for that is a substitute for cautery in those areas.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, cautery with fire is still the more reliable method.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already described the treatment with sharp medicine in the section, so use that method when you need to apply it.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter LIII.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	Of cautery for claws and of the other similar parts.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Spots of whiteness found in the areas affected by foot disease that is called gout, and it is a major cause, an incision, which deforms the foot; and cautery on those [spots] is done in two ways, one with fire cautery and the other with hot water cautery.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qualisia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then place that heated instrument on the shoulder, and then rotate your hand with the cautery around the shoulder until the cautery reaches the depth of the shoulder.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And leave that for three days until it begins to sweat [or drain] from the arm. 
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And then apply a plaster made with crushed wild mallows mixed with salt, and leave the plaster on that area for one night, because this will root out its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with an ointment made from generative flesh until it is healed. 
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it does not convert, and you often find occurrences on the surface of the body, particularly in the hands and feet, then you must administer those cauterizations with water. Take a quill made of horn or iron or reed, and place that over the claw; then pour into the quill a small amount of hot water, and withdraw your hand, and rotate it with the compression of your hand all around, pressing the edge of the quill against the root of the claw; you will find that the hot water finds its way to the veins at the root of the claw. The patient should endure for an hour the bite of the hot water, and then remove it, as the claw with its roots will be eradicated.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And do this with those that are close to each other until you cover all of them on the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And then treat those pus areas where the roots of the claws have been eradicated with ointments that cause the flesh to regenerate.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter XLIV.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	On the cauterization for trembling.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When there is a tremor due to cold in the nerves or from a cold fever, or for some similar reason, then you must cauterize that area with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of the back, placing one cautery between each vertebra; and also apply a cautery on their feet, and on their stomach, using an olive-shaped cautery.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the tremor of the patient subsides and hastens the health from the cold disease.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter V. 
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Of the cauterization of accidental injuries to the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When in the body there are eruptions and pustules that split open, which are made of thick corrupted materials; therefore, at the beginning when they appear, it should be cauterized all over the head of the fistula with a subtle cautery using myrtle wood, the end of which is extended by fire; or with shards of long glass; or with a lentil-shaped cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And sometimes the cautery is also applied at the beginning of its expulsion according to this method; and they are not believed to be harmful, and the excess is disrupted by doing these things, and it heals from them.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, this should be done before evacuation with phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter LVI.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	On the cauterization of accidental blood flow due to an artery cut.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Often, an artery that is cut causes the wound to swell where it protrudes, or at the beginning of abscesses or cautery of the limb, and similar situations, making it difficult to remain in place.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore, when this happens to someone, then you cover the artery's opening with your hand, and press on it with your finger to firmly hold those particles within until the blood flow stops, and that it does not come out.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then place in the fire the small and large olive-shaped cautery tools in great number, and blow on them until they become very hot.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take one of those, either small or large depending on the location and the severity of the wound where the artery is broken, and quickly place it over that vein after you have cleaned your finger, and hold the cautery until it seals and constricts the bleeding.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you remove your finger and extract the cautery, then take another heated cautery from those that are prepared in the fire, and continue to do this one after the other until the bleeding is stopped.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And be careful not to burn the nerves that are there, and ensure no other harm comes to the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to stop the bleeding in any other way except by one of four methods: using a cautery as we have mentioned, or by extraction when it cannot be extracted because when it is extracted, the ends of the fibers are burned and the bleeding stops, or binding it with astringent medicine or a strong ligature, or placing medicines on it that have the property to stop bleeding; and bind them tightly with a bandage with appropriate constriction.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	And here is the translation of the provided line:
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	If this condition affects someone and the doctor is not present nor medicine available, then open with careful pressure of the index finger on the orifice of that vein as we have said, and apply great compression to prevent the blood from flowing out of the most critical part of the wound; do not remove your finger from the artery; above the artery sprinkle cold water of great chilliness until the blood is congealed and thickened; and further sew where cauterization or medication is necessary.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begin the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	About incision and puncture and cupping and bloodletting and wounds and their similarities.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter about all diseases in which cauterization with fire is appropriate and with burning medicine, as well as the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for them along with the forms of the cauteries; and I have ordered the chapters from the highest part of the head down to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And I will proceed in this chapter in the same manner, so that the seeker may be relieved concerning this, now regarding what they have asked about.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before I begin this, son, you must learn that in this chapter is discussed with great detail what was mentioned first in the chapter on cautery.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And for this reason, great caution must be exercised, because in the operations that are described in this chapter, many times there is evacuation which involves blood, with which life depends on the sprinkling of the vein or cutting into the abscess or applying treatment for excision or purging of the wound or extraction of an arrow or incision of stone and similar procedures.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And with all of these is accompanied fear and trembling, and in the majority of cases, death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I admonish you that this should not fall upon you in which there is danger, for sometimes your ways as a person can be mixed with the ways of diseases. 
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And of them are some who will go with their illness and it is light but leads to death, and this due to the intensity of what they find in their illness, and by the length of their illness, and with the illness comes fear which signifies death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And among those is the one who gives you their possessions and says, hoping for that person's health, and their illness is perilous.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore you should not consent to those who come to you in this manner; and your caution must be greater than your covetousness and greed; and do not presume any cause over this without certain knowledge that confirms what you owe, and for which praiseworthy success follows.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And it is used in the cure of all your diseases for prognosis and indication to him whose health is restored, because in that you find assistance towards acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	O, sons, God inspire in you His understanding and do not remove from you direction and protection, for this is in His hands.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have ordered this chapter distinguishing by sections according to what was preceded in the chapter on cauterization, from the care of the head down to the feet, so that it may be made easier for you what you ask about and of which you have need.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	On the treatment of water that is contained in the head of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this disease often occurs due to childbirth and when the wet nurse tightly binds the child's head with cloths.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And sometimes it occurs due to hidden causes that are not known.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	But I have seen this disease only in children; and in all those cases, death followed closely, and thus it seems to me that it is a fatal condition in them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and the head of the child was so enlarged that he could not support himself due to the size of his head, and the humidity increased until it caused death.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this moisture either accumulates between the tendon and the bone, or it accumulates under the bone on the spine.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	For the operation in such a case where the moisture is between the tendon and the bone and the abscess is small, then you must make an incision at the center of the head with a slit横向的翻译不太合适，我将根据上下文调整以确保意义正确：
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And therefore, if the humidity is increased more and the abscess is larger, then there are here two incisions according to this method:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the humidity is near the bone, a sign of it is that you see the corners of the head open on all sides and water is squeezed out when you press that area with your hand from inside and this was not hidden from you. 
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	You must cut in the middle of the head with three incisions according to this manner:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And then extract all the moisture through the incision; and then secure the incisions with bandages and poultices; and then cover it with wine and oil until the fifth day, and then remove the dressing and treat the wound with lint and ointments, and bind the head evenly; and feed the patient with dry food of little moisture until the member is strengthened and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another method of incision, where you should consider the size of the abscess and the collection of water, because sometimes it is more pronounced in the occiput, or in the front part, or on the right side, or on the left side; and therefore direct the incision to where the abscess and the accumulation of water appear, and do this according to what is best possible for you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And be careful not to cut the artery, which could cause a flow of blood and lead to the patient's death due to that blood flow and evacuation of moisture.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter II.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	From the incision of the arteries that are near the ears, called helixes.
Capitol segon.	Chapter second.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When catarrh or rheumatism occurs in the lungs or foot, and this is an old condition, and you do not find healing through medicines, then the last remedy for this is to start with those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And therefore when you want to incise those areas where the patient shaves his head, then rub the area with a rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and then tightly bind the neck of the patient with some cloth; and then consider where the vein pulses; and press the spots on each side near the ears, which are hidden in some men.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then mark over the artery with a probe, and then incise each one with a sharp spatum (a type of surgical knife) from each side, penetrating into the bone, and let this be according to the width of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you want, insert the spatum under the artery and break it at the points above the incisions.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And let the length of the incision be about two fingers together, for when any vein is cut, blood is expelled with a pulsating flow, which bursts out frequently.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	But if the artery does not appear at first, then you must measure from the ear a distance of three fingers, and then mark it with a probe, and go into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And what needs to be let out of the blood is a quantity of wine unciae, and forcefully it does not let out more or less, and all of this depends on the amount that appears from the strength of the patient and the fullness of their artery.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then examine the wound, and if any fragment of the splinter remains in the bone, then cut out that part so it does not cause an abscess.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen the wound with poultices and linen bandages, and then treat it with ointments until it heals.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	On the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When one suffers from chronic migraines or sharp pains, due to moistures and qualities in the veins of the temples, or if these are severe and similar to those conditions, and they are treated with medical methods of cure but do not improve, then we resort to extracting the arteries in the temples, or cauterizing them as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the method of the operation and extraction is that the patient shaves the hairs that are on the temples; and locate the artery visible in the temple where it is shown to you by its pulse, as it is hidden in only a few people due to strong cold.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is obscured from you, then the patient's neck should be stretched with some cloth; and then rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until the artery becomes clearly visible to you.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And now take the spatula, which has the following shape:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you carefully scrape the vein with that instrument until you reach the artery; and then insert it in there and extract it from the superior parts until you remove it from the vein and expose it from the tissues that cover it, on all sides.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the artery is delicate, then wrap it with the tip of a needle, and then cut a part of it according to the amount by which its ends are elongated and contracted, and no blood flow will result, because if they are not cut, the blood will not flow out completely.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then evacuate one to three uncii (ounces) of blood.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, then it must be tied at two places with strong double-threaded silk or with long threads, and do not worry about putrefaction before the wound heals and blood flow stops.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then cut away the excess that is between two ligaments; and do this at that time or another appropriate time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you want, cauterize that area with a cautery between the bones using a knife-shaped cautery before cutting off the extremities of it, and let it remain in place for the same procedure. 
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better work if the patient does not have fever or is of overheated constitution; for cautery is one of those causes that helps finishing off the harmful moistures, and thus is better in treatment.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And it is also necessary to extract the arteries that fill the space of the old wound, and they should be placed on decently prepared ash, and then treated with dry medicines that cause flesh to grow and with warm compresses until it is healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while you are working another time blood flows from the artery, then you should take care to stop that bleeding, either by cautery or by filling the wound space, and hold your hand until the bleeding is stopped.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if none of those causes are present, then place your finger on the area until the blood congeals, and sprinkle the area with water of strong coldness until the sharp pain subsides, and bind it as necessary.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And the lighter method for extracting an artery is to cauterize the vein with this cautery having two blades, since you have marked the two spots with a probe, and then wait, ignite it, until it reaches the bone and severs the vein in two places, so that what is between the ends of it is extended, as they are not fully joined by this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And let the sharpness of both knives be tested.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, if there is less sharpness with two knives it is better, because if they are as sharp as two knives near each cut, and do not split the flesh too quickly. 
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, since there is some swelling in those areas, heat from fire is applied to them and the flesh is cut slightly.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better than all other works and lighter.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And let the space which is between two ribs be the quantity of the thickness of a finger.
Capitol quart.	Chapter four.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	On the treatment of acute and acidic tears of the eyes.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When those tears are acidic, and it is the condition of those veins which are on top of the head that have become protruded, and you find no other cause for medical treatment, often the face of the patient turns red and they feel a crawling sensation in their forehead as if ants were crawling, and their eyes become exhausted to such an extent that their eyelashes seem known [likely meant to be 'visible'], and the eyelids are inflamed due to the sharpness of the tears. Ancient bitter mixtures were used in the treatment of those suffering from this condition, and I name that treatment with spassa [a medicinal substance].
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And you command the patient to shave the hairs that are on their forehead, and then make three incisions in the forehead equally spaced according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the incision is about two fingers: the first incision should be equally distant from the length of the nose at the middle of the forehead, the second according to the length a little beyond the movement of the tear ducts which are in the lacrimal area, and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And guard against the beginning of the arteries that are on two sides, and extend your hand from the continuation of both jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space between each incision is the quantity of three fingers placed together.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a piece of sponge prepared or dry cloths with which you dry the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then insert the spatula with two sharp ends, of which this is the form of the incision:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	The text appears to be in an old Romance language that shares similarities with Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Given the context of medieval medical treatise, here is my translation for the provided sentence:
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then stretch the spatula and insert it into the first incision again using another instrument called a cutellar, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And place the sharp side of that against the adjacent flesh and the tendon, and the other side against the bone, and push it in until it reaches the middle crack, and cut off all the vessels that descend from the head to the heels with that.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	And continue the incision to this part of the tendon, and then do this in the middle crack between another crack.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And when an equal amount of blood flows out, press the areas where the clotted blood is located.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then place in each crack some old wool, and put over those dusts mixed with wine and oil and sour wine, and ensure that no harmful swelling occurs.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day, remove the bandage and administer a large infusion of warm or tepid water, and then treat it with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil and other ingredients until the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	Capitol .v.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	For the given sentence:
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When there comes to someone acute and continuous catharsis (discharge), and sometimes the eyes of the patient become weakened slightly, and their vision is debilitated, and the eyelids are ulcerated with the hair falling out, and in the frontal area of the head there is sharp pain leading to sneezing, then you know by these symptoms that the matters and discharges do not come but from small veins inside the body.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure for these is this: command the patient to shave their forehead, and then make an incision in that area at the center of the forehead, a small one in width (and begin with the incision from the left temple towards the right temple; and let the incision be into the bone; and move your hand away from the swollen areas of the temples which are affected by chewing), until the bone is exposed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	And dry all the blood with a sponge or a dry cloth, and then fill between the two edges of the incision with old lint or cloths.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then apply powdered material soaked in wine and oil on top to prevent an inflammatory swelling from forming.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you remove that and see that the swelling has diminished, then it is necessary to rub the bone until new flesh begins to form, and then treat it with a drying regimen that promotes flesh growth, such as taking two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mixing them together, and from this make a plaster which should be applied to these areas to promote the birth of new flesh.
Capitol .vi.	Capitol .vi.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	For the given sentence:
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	Every cause that affects the ears is of four types: either it is a mineral stone or something similar to a stone, such as iron and glass, or it is from plants like chickpeas or beans, or it is due to fluid causes like water and sour wine and things similar to them, or some creature.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And therefore, when a stone enters the ear or another similar cause occurs that does not fit or grow in the ear, expose the ear to the sun, and if you can remove the stone, then distill some violet oil or sizami into it, and then administer its extract, and make them sneeze with condizi, and plug the nostrils before the sneezing event.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	Then place some pieces of cloth or wool around the ear's opening, and stretch the ear upwards, as this method is often effective with these kinds of causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not resolved, then administer the extract using an instrument called the gesti epicicarios subtil, which has the following form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is effectively resolved with the gesti, that is good; and if not, then administer the extract using a fine needle of minimal doubling.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And if it is not blocked by that, then make a tube from a reed and insert the end of the tube into the ear canal, and seal around the tube with wax and softened oil so that nothing is open except the tube.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	Then draw out with your breath with strong suction, for it helps greatly as we have recounted.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	But if it is not unblocked in this manner, then take some alkali or a similar substance with which birds are caught in small quantities, and place that at the end of the reed, and then wrap something around it properly.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	Then insert that into the ear canal gently, and then dry the ear of its moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And if it is not unblocked by all the methods we have described, then you should consider cutting it before it develops into an abscess or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	The method of cutting it is that you first bleed the patient from the saphenous vein and extract blood according to the strength of the patient. Then, hold the ear between your fingers and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the tip of the earlobe, squeezing out the pus from the pressed area.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And if the crack of lunar shape reaches the stone, and once the stone is found, remove it with appropriate instruments if you can; then immediately close the crack quickly at that moment, and care for it until it heals.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause of the issue in the ear is one of the growths that have grown and become inflamed, then administer its treatment and extraction; but if it does not respond to this method, then take a thin, delicate spatula according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and use it to remove the growth that has occurred in the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not perform this when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, and place it in soft pieces, then carefully extract them with your fingers or delicate movements, or by incision as we have said, for the extraction is easier.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But when water has entered the ear, the patient should start with a sneeze under certain conditions, and fill their ear with some old cloth, then jump over the ear in which there is water; if it is thus expelled, that is good. If not, take thin stone rods and levers according to the length of a finger, heat them slightly over fire, and have the patient insert one of these into the passage of their ear and jump on one foot from that side while striking the stone inside the ear with another stone.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Therefore, do not stop until all the water has been completely drained off.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And once the water has been completely drained, take a piece of paper or cotton, and insert one end into the ear, then extend the other end and ignite it until the middle part burns.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	Then insert another cotton wad and repeat this process until all the water has been completely drained, and strain it with a tube as described above for the stone extractor.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	However, in the extraction of foreign objects entering the ear, if it is small and similar in appearance, treat it as we have said above; but if it is large and causes pain deep within the eardrum, then administer its removal with gentle movements and pressure, and the cause of this is less serious than all other causes that occur in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	However, in the extraction of worms generated in the ear, when you treat it with what we have said in the section and in the treatment of distillations and your cure does not take effect, then you must examine the ear in sunlight.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And therefore if any cause of worms appears, then extract them by gesture or with subtle tweezers; but if no cause appears, then take a tube that is narrow at one end and wide at the other, which has this form:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the thin extremity into the ear according to the amount that the patient can endure; then suck through it with strong suction, and do this several times until all the worms are expelled.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	And if you do not obey the instructions, then plug and close the cannula circuit with wax as we have said; then administer distillates that have already been proven effective in the treatment of worms, and you will find this in the treatise on distillates.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let your effusion be with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear using this instrument, which has the following form:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make it of silver or bronze, leaving it straight, with a small tube in which there is a flat top on it.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And thus it should be designed to fit into the cavity of the cannula container where it will be necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the rod and wrap the end of it with a small piece of cloth, then pour oil into the concavity of the ear, or juice from some herb, or any such medicine into the cannula — which is in the ear — and then insert the rod with the cloth on top and press gently with your hand until the oil is forced into the ear's concavity and the patient feels the oil inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And that which is inserted into the ear should already be slightly warmed with fire.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And be careful that the substance you distill into the ear is not too cold, for medicines for the ear do not tolerate that.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the treatment of ear obstruction.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Sometimes, some children are born with unperforated ear canals from their mothers, and this also happens in some adults, where the obstruction occurs in the flesh of the ear due to an infection or soft tissue growth there. This obstruction sometimes occurs in the area before the passage of the ear which does not hear sound, and at other times it is in the outer parts.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which occurs in the area before it, where sound is not perceived, is among the more difficult conditions to heal.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in the case where sound is perceived, you must expose the patient's ear to the sun and look into it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And when there is an obvious swelling, open it with a fine scalpel of this form:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	And the extremity of it should be narrow in width, with one end sharp and the other blunt; and the scalpel should have two smooth sides so that it does not irritate the skin.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And if the obstruction is due to flesh grown in the ear or within it, then use fine needles and cut into it with great ease until all the flesh is removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the obstruction is in the canal of the ear, then take a fine, smooth rod, warm it slightly over fire, and then insert it into the ear canal.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And if you have detected an obstruction that the patient finds easy to exhale due to gravity, relieve the pressure on it easily; and be careful not to harm the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then place in the ear a piece of cloth as wide as the size of the tube that you have wrapped with Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound. Alternatively, take wax, soften it in warm water, and sprinkle finely ground powder over it and use it. If you find that the ear is already swollen, then you must extract the wax and replace it with other wax that you wrap in cloth made with rose oil, until the swelling subsides; and continue to care for it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	And if a flow of blood occurs, then soak a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it over the wound, and use another treatment that restricts the flow of blood, which is described in the chapter on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Capitol .viii.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	For the treatment of athelisz (or a condition affecting) which occurs at the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Attaching the meanings that sometimes reach the eyelids of the eyes with moisture, at other times they are dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore, you must hold those with tweezers or by their roots, and cut them from their bases with a knife, then place your hand over the trimmed areas.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	And if pain with a flow of blood occurs, then you cauterize those areas with a subtle lens-shaped cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is performed near the incisions and visible veins when there remains any cause of their recurrence; and when they are cauterized with fire, those veins are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment for swelling that occurs in the eyelids of the eyes.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Visible particles appearing in the eyelids of the eyes, some cause of which resembles swelling in its strength and hardness, and therefore it is called swelling.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an accumulation of thick moisture on the eyelid beneath and above.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the procedure for it is to consider whether the swelling originates in such a way that it appears from the eyelid and is rough on all sides; and the cause of it is slight.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore, make an incision over it along its width, and then scrape it thoroughly from all sides until it dries out, and then suspend it with a bandage and close it up.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if you are not prepared at the beginning of the procedure and cannot penetrate the eyelid with an incision little by little, then this should not be a cause for concern.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the wound is large, then you adjust it with stitches; and take care of what is inside so that it heals.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is minor, you will not suffer harm from it because the warmth of it restores and reinvigorates that area.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the swelling is decreasing inside the eyelid and affecting the inner surface, then open the eyelid and suspend the swelling with an ounce of something that you can apply from the start, and press it on all sides; and if the eyelid is elongated due to the incision, this should not be a cause for concern.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	Then after the incision, wash the wound with salt water; and treat the area with something that promotes healing until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	On the treatment around the upper eyelid of the eye.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Almost always gray matter is generated in the tunics of the upper eyelid, and especially so in children, it aggravates their eyes and affects their sight greatly; and they cannot look at the brightness of the sun because tears gather to them.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And for this reason you find them lying on their faces all the time, and they sleep with their faces down; and so at the eyelids of their eyes, the eyebrows are moist, which have already been covered by swelling, and an appearance of cataract is evident in the eye; and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel a hard mass inside.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And in one method of the operation, the patient places their head on your lap, and then you place a cloth over them and heat it up. Then make a circle according to the amount that contains arthernach (likely a medieval substance) from all sides. Then place that over this and press with your fingers all around so that arthernach is aggregated in the middle of the circle. Then introduce moisture into the center of that using a spatula inserted through a slit along its width, and the slit should not be larger than the one made in flaubotomy (a type of surgical incision).
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	Moreover, in the first step, you must cut through the entire chain until you reach arthernach, because in most positions, you process arthernach through a slit according to the form of white grease.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Therefore, extract that using cloths with which you have wrapped between your fingers on the outer parts and rotate between the right and left hand until it is dispersed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be careful not to insert the spatula too deeply so that it does not reach the bone and damage it.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	However, if arthernach does not appear at the beginning of the slit, insert into the slit a small amount with ease until arthernach is processed; then extract it as we have said; then soak cloths in warm, sweet water and place them over the area and press them with powder.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And so they use those who carry salt and place it in the cavity of the fissure so that it removes that moisture.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that which is inside so that it may be healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	And if you encounter an abscess in that area, then treat it with soft plasters until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	On methods of applying to the stomach.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When on the eyelids of the eyes, natural hairs grow twisted and old, these annoy the eye and lead to various illnesses such as continuous tearing and softening of the eyelids and membranes, which can cause destruction of the eye, a condition called entropion. This is treated in four ways: by cauterization with fire; through acute medicine as previously mentioned in the chapter on cautery; by performing an atactini (a type of surgical procedure) involving incision and suturing; or by using cantharus (special instruments), which I will explain.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	Therefore, you must place the head of the patient in your lap; then turn the eyelid with your left hand. If it turns, that is good; if not, insert a needle into the area where there is pus beneath the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate with thread above it, near the margin of the eyelid where the hairs grow, close to the hairs. Pull the thread towards the upper part with the eyelid, and turn it using the thread.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then insert into the area inside the eyelid, leaving the hairs attached with an instrument that enters from the larger lacrimal duct into the smaller one; and then extract the bile and place a small amount of cotton or cloth powder on the eyelid, and then sew over the eyelid with thread, and it should be thus as in the figure of a myrtle leaf.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, it must be according to the amount of lifting of the eyelid, for this varies among men, for some require a large incision in the eyelid depending on the extent to which the eyelid is drooping.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	Then insert the spatula between the two lines that you have marked, and begin from the larger tear duct towards the smaller one.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your incision is close to the natural hairline, thus it is for the majority of people. 
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then insert the bone into one of the two angles of the chain, and then scrape that area entirely, and then join the two lips with a suture using thread or fine wool glue, and clean the blood, and make adhere what is superfluous from the glues over both eyebrows with some viscous causes if you wish to do so, and if not, don’t worry about it.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And then remove the suture of the glues within three or four days, and then take care of it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, leave the wound without sutures, and treat it with substances that dry and constrict, for the eyelid being raised requires the sealing of the wound and the addition thereof; however, suturing is better. This is what the ancients taught regarding this matter.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	However, one must be careful with the patient, and it is of good practice, and not out of fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another method in surgery, which involves shaping the eyelid like a myrtle leaf, and then elevate the eyelid with three separated and brought together needles according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	If it is not possible to do that, keep the hooks, and if this is not sufficient, then take a needle with thread and insert it into the middle of the figure, and place another thread close to the larger tear duct, and the second thread close to the smaller tear duct, adjust between these threads equally, and then with those lift your hand in equal elevation, lifting all the chain over which is marked as we have described.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then bring together the two lips of the wound with stitches, and care for it so that it may heal.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	And if an abscess occurs in your incision or your wound, drain that abscess with a cautery and similarly, with unguents.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And sometimes you may encounter an eyelid where the hairs are inverted; then you should use what we have mentioned about incision; however, in some cases, stitching is more appropriate.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	To treat with reeds follows this method:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And it is that you turn the eyelid inside out and split the structure within as I have described; then, make two reeds or two fine strips whose length should be according to the length of the eyelid and their width should be a third of the width of the spatula.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already made incisions at the ends of each part where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then add each one with subtlety over what is excessive on the eyelid of the eye, and constrain the reeds of each part with strong tension, and leave it like that for several days, because the constriction by the tension will cause it to die and detach and fall off on its own.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	And if it is delayed, then break through with forceps, and then treat the wound until it heals.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Therefore, when it is secured, the eyelid is lifted and the hairs do not pierce.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the form of two canes which you will make according to this shape:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and there should be neither more nor less than the quantity of the length and the width.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	On the removal of hard, piercing hairs in the eye using a needle.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When there are unnatural, hard, rough, and piercing hairs in the eyes, then the procedure is that you should take a fine needle and place it in a thread of fine linen or silk, and then carefully adjust the ends of the needle and hold each end precisely and subtly.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And let the length of the threads be the quantity of one palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then you should place another fine thread under it briefly, and hold the ends of that thread if you wish.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then place the patient's head on your lap, and bring them close to the light so that your work may be clear, for it is a delicate and fine operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then insert the needle into the root of the hair that requires treatment, and make it penetrate quickly into the eyelid before removing it from the natural hair.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull the hair up and insert it into the eyelash area, and let the hairs be one or two or three and no more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand with it until the hair is implanted into the eyelash area on the eyelid along with the natural hair.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	But if the eyelash area is pulled and the hair is not implanted, pull the eyelash area to the sides with the adhesive that you have prepared with it, until the eyelash area is properly implanted from the root.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And cover it with a linen cloth, for when you implant the eyelashes and the adhesive, and wrap everything tightly with the cloth, leave the cloths on for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place and grows well in that area.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the hair is shorter, then you attach a long natural hair to it, and elevate it with that, or leave it in between so that it stretches somewhat apart, and then you lift it.
Capitol .xiii.	Capitol .xiii.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	For the given line:
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When there is a twitching in the eye, and it is a contraction of the eyelid when it contracts inward or to the right or left side due to poor healing of a wound or from dryness or cautery, and it is called leporina, and this ahercrati (which can be natural or accidental) is caused by improper healing of wounds or dryness or cautery, or resembles such maladies.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The method of the operation is that you cut through that consolidation and separate the lips of it, and place in it a piece of linen cloth where those are, and tie them until they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And you do not need to use treatments for the causes that dry out, constrain; for if you do so, it will cause more harm than good, worse than at any time before.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use in those cases that mollify thus as fenugreek is, and foment with the water in which they are cooked leaves and seeds of it, or balm oil, which should be liquefied with some of the oils, and submerge the cloth in that, and treat with it.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your cure is that you should puncture with all skill what has not been consolidated according to the form at the beginning. 
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation which we have mentioned is nothing but some correction of the dislocation that does not return the area to its former shape.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Of the treatment for a sty, which is formed in the eyelid.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This sty, which is formed in the eyelid and is properly named a sty; it can be of a natural cause or an accidental one.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	The accidental sty is caused by trauma or by cuts or by cautery or by other similar factors.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the method of the operation is that you take a needle with double thread, and insert it into the flesh, making it pass from the left tear duct to the right tear duct, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then stretch the flesh apart with the needle and secure it with the needle, and incise with a wide spatulum.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And then restore the shape of the eyelid as needed; if not, take the forceps and place it in the cut area, and use that to adjust the eyelid, creating the two slits on the side of the lower eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And let the ends of the two fissures of two angles of the incision that you have made come together, and from them make an angle where they meet to form a figure from them.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is a Greek letter: lambda. 
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then remove the flesh in such an amount that it is equal to the thickness of the sharp edge left on it, which is the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then align the separated parts and sew them together with wool thread; then treat them with the mollifying medicines and warm compresses until they are healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if it is necessary to operate by incision or suture or cautery, then you must make a flat incision on the skin of the eyelid as described.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate with a warm compress between the two lips as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In summary, for the treatment of an excrescence that appears above or below, which occurs during the operation, according to the form in which the excrescence is prepared, and that is in the shape of various particles.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the wise artisans always prepare in each manner that is possible for them until they restore the figure to its natural form or close to it, and they do so according to what is most convenient for the patient in terms of the operation and the instruments being used.
Capitol .xv.	Capitol .xv.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Of the adherence of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation occurs in many men, it often happens that the upper eyelid adheres to the white part of the eye, and is restricted in its ease of movement and natural functions; therefore, you must insert the tip of a spatula under the eyelid, lift it up or extend it with a probe.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	Then you should cut through the adherence with a fine spatula, which should not be sharp at the tip to avoid disturbing the patient during the operation; keep the spatula blunt enough so that it does not injure the eye with its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And your incision should be such that it easily separates the adherence, allowing the eyelid to return to its natural form and for all of the adherence to heal.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	Then you should put salty water into the eye with which you wash it; or drip onto it juniper dissolved in water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	Then separate the eyelid from the eye with a quill, and place wool soaked in egg white over the eye; on the third day, use remedies to promote healing until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Capitol .xvi.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	From the inflammation of the eyelid and the swelling of flesh around the tear ducts.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that the eyelid is considered in two ways: either it is nervous, and resembles a hard but subtle membrane; or it is non-nervous, resembling white congealed moisture, which when touched with iron or forcibly taken hold of, is severed and the iron does not penetrate it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both types do not begin except from the major tear duct, where it gradually covers the sight and prohibits light and the movement of the eyelid.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	However, the method of treating the inflammation is that the patient places their head on your shoulder, and then opens their eyes, and you lift the eyelid with your hand, and then grasp the eyelid with a small double-bladed instrument and extend it upwards.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	Then take a needle and insert a horsehair or ox hair or cow hair, or something similar, or strong thread, or double the tip of the needle little by little and place it in the middle of the eyelid, and penetrate it with the needle, and tie the eyelid with thread; then extend it upwards, and pluck out the hairs from the edge of the eyelid that are near the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And in this way you should insert it with the poultice into the rear of him.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then you cut into the remainder at the root of the tear duct with a fine spatula or small scissors, and clear the flesh around the natural tear duct so that from this incision there will not be continuous flow of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the nail is removed with the sun one inch extended or with wax, as we have said, and then it should be extracted with a lion-shaped spatula, which has this form:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And be careful not to touch the corneal layer with the spatula and cause a rupture, and ensure that the pupil is not perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then the incision lets a little finely ground salt or dust made of sage into the eye and leave it there until the next day; then treat it with what is necessary until it heals.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the nail is not firmly attached and you cannot insert the needle, nor is it fixed in that one-inch area, then this kind of detached nail is treated with medicines and healed in this manner as I have described and detailed in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to incise that area, then open the abdomen of the patient and take a slender lancet with a sharp point as follows:
am subtilitat.	And with subtlety. 
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if you find that it is rarefied and confused and penetrates into that region, then distill from your ore into the horn of a stag or with a red horn or with ground salt, and plug the nostril until the next day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat the operation on that area until everything of it is removed, except where the opposite swelling has to be cauterized in the wound, because when you leave that, treat at the beginning the swelling until it heals.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat your operation on that area until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The prominence of the lacrimal flesh, if noted in the nose for great harm, should be suspended with an ounce; and incise that from one side, and do not complete the incision so that you do not cut through the tear ducts.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then apply an ointment to the lacrimal area and treat it until it is healed. 
Capitol .xvii.	Capitol .xvii.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	From the inscription of arthritic conditions and that which is born from tightly adhered flesh in the joint.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	When in the eyes of some there is born rough flesh, and it is placed over so that it covers the pupil, or approaches or tightens around the eyelids, and forcibly draws the eyelids together from the outside parts and attaches itself like a railing.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	Here is the translation of the provided text line by line:
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And the incision should be made either with the instrument you use to incise those areas or with a scalpel which we have recommended in the section on nails, or with small scissors with which abscesses are collected according to how it will be described in this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	And when your incision is complete and all that flesh is removed, then fill the wound with finely ground salt, or sprinkle on it red powder similar to corrosive medicines, and place over the wound a cloth dipped in egg white until it is ensured that no swelling occurs.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if any cause for concern remains and the wound bleeds freely, and you fear swelling, then leave the wound open and treat that swelling with whatever alleviates it, and then repeat the operation until it is healed. Similarly, do this for the flesh around the wound where such an incident occurs.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	However, you must ensure that all healing of the wound occurs either naturally or accidentally, act with care, and do not insert your hand into any of these operations until you see that the member can sufficiently withstand such an operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Capitol .xviii.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	From the collection of knowledge in the belly.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Know the red veins that are swollen on the eye and prevent the eyelid from its operation, and anoint the eye with ointment for several days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning that you consider whether the wound in which the scab is formed is strong and there is no other illness in it, then you gather that scab.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And you command the patient to place their head on your lap, and then suspend those veins with an ounce or two according to your discretion; and that ounce should be of fine twofold linen in this manner:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	Or use two ounces gradually in one piece according to this method:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And then gather those veins with fine threads carefully, and wipe the blood little by little until you see those veins are cleansed of filth and turned clean.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And be careful that you do not lead the filth with the tip of the spatula; and let your operation be in the morning when the sun is up, and be firm in your procedure so that you only incise those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed this, then distill into the filth some strong or red vinegar so that with its acidity it corrodes what remains of the sabell. 
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	And if it is not possible for you to gather everything at that moment, then plaster over the entire area with something that alleviates his pain, and leave it for several days until his pain is calmed and an abscess is prevented.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	Then treat the second area in the same manner until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form of the scissors:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On the reduction of nasal fractures.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat fractures with cautery or sharp, burning medicine according to the preceding narration and it is not healed, then do not act rashly but make an incision over the abscess once it has matured, and extract all the moisture within it until the bone is exposed.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then, when the bone is exposed and you find corruption or blackening in it, then scrape it with an instrument that has the following form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is called a rough head, and it is made of Indian iron, with the tip being round like an asir, which is made by puncturing with a file or finely hammering it into points (as shown in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place that over the corrupted area of the bone, then rotate it between your fingers, and press your hand little by little until you know that the corruption is scraped away.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And this should be done several times, then restore the area with drying and astringent causes.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Therefore, if the area is consolidated and good flesh has formed there, and the wound is separated from the pus and heals for forty days, and it does not recur, and does not become inflamed or result in any other accidents, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, then the goal is to realign the fracture to resemble its original form, and according to this method: you must expose the bone using either an iron instrument or sharp medicine, and once the bone is exposed, then take hold of it in this manner:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The tip of the instrument should be triangular, and the shaft should gradually narrow toward the tip in this way.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	Then place that over the bone, near the lacrimal area; extend your hand slightly from the nose, and then rotate your hand with the instrument until it penetrates the entire bone, causing the patient to feel a slight breeze as air escapes when you do so.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore, now restore the area with astringent and drying medicines as you have been instructed.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Therefore, when the flesh and the area have hardened, the material that was flowing out to the outer parts returns inward, thus making the condition lighter on the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	On the reduction of a protrusion in the eye.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the eye protrudes entirely and there is no damage or diminution to the vision, then you should loosen the patient, and subsequently follow up with applying air blisters on the neck after scarification and good suction; and then apply an ointment over the eye which is made of acacia, aloe, ensam (a type of gum), and sarcocolle (a kind of resin); and finally secure the poultice over the eye with dusted powders.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the method for the powders is that you take lion's hair, and each piece of hair should be divided into four parts; and make the powder from those hairs. 
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then place those one over the other according to the amount that the wound requires.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And then bind over those with a strong cloth with tight binding; and repeat the cupping with suction and scarification; and then remove the cups and leave the wound exposed day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if the bandage becomes loosened, then it must be tightened.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And then remove the bandage day and night as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the wound has already been reduced, it is good, and if not, then repeat the poultice with the powders and binding and cupping until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	On the inflammation of the uveal membrane (tunica uvea).
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is a rupture in the uveal membrane, and it becomes prominent and protrudes from the eyelids like a knot of flesh, taking on a human-like shape due to this, if you want to incise it, the operation should be performed as we have described: you insert a needle at the base of the uvea from below upward, then place another needle with a double thread from the lacrimal part, and make that penetrate while keeping the first needle in its position; then cut the area of the double thread and lift the portion of the uvea around the needle with it, and tighten that well.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	Then remove the needle and place over the wound wool soaked in egg white, and leave until the thread comes out with the grape.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then treat the wound with something that strengthens it internally so that the ailment may be healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And sometimes, gather from all sides with a circle of cloth around the swollen area of the wound, and then pierce it with a fine spatula to reach the core of the wound, allowing the whitish fluid to drain out, and reduce the swelling, entering quickly into treatment.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen it internally so that it may be healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio de alconati.	On the treatment of dislocations.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This ailment, which is called dislocation, is nothing but a swelling that is fixed in the joint, resembling descending water, but it is not that.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The method of treating it is to have the patient sit on an adjusted and straight chair. Then take their head in both your hands and move it so that you see the swelling come to its proper places, then let it dry and not descend. Leave the light on, and the patient will see the causes thus as they appear. 
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not descend downwards, know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	And if the descent of the pus has not been prepared as we have said, then make the patient sit between your hands and take a fine spatula and use it to gently separate the panniculus from the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corneal tunic at the limbus (inside the black part), until the pus is completely discharged.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Once it is completely discharged, then you should instill warm water in the nose, in which you have mixed honey, or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then it should be treated with other methods until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the treatment of water (discharge) coming from the nose.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already mentioned the types of discharge in the division and which ones require piercing with clear instructions according to health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Now you must make the patient sit between your hands on a chair and tie their nose tightly with a binding agent.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And then place your left hand near the eyelid of his eye if the eye in which there is water is the left eye; or with your right hand, if the eye is the right one.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And then with your right hand take the almond, if the eye is left; or with your left hand, if the eye is right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And then place the tip of the almond near the crown along the thickness of the ray in the white part of the eye towards the smaller tear duct, and then insert the almond with force and rotate your hand accordingly. 
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then penetrate into the soft part of the wound and feel that the swelling has already reached there due to it.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And it is necessary that the measurement of the path from almond to pupil be equal to the space between the pupil and the end of the dark part, which is the crown of the eye; for through this you will see the pupil with the vision of the eye due to the clarity of the cornea.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And then place your hand within the location where the water is, and then you pull it down once after another, and if the water descends immediately, now look at the patient on which he directs his gaze immediately, and quickly in their own way. 
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then rest for a while; if the water has descended, now you should pause again before any more is poured.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And then when it is inserted and does not descend, you should extract it easily, and rotate it with your hand gradually; then dissolve a small amount of clear gem salt in water and wash the wound inside with that solution. Then place a piece of cloth or plug or wool soaked in oiled resin and egg white and glue this to seal the wound.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	But we and those of our time place upon that gum, toasted with egg white.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if your probe does not obey the hardness of the wound—since there are some people whose wounds are very hard—it is necessary to take the spatula named alberid, which has the following form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And then pierce that joint with it, and do not linger your hand in the act, and only make a subtle way for the probe to enter.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	Then insert the probe as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you should complete your work by preparing the patient's dark room where they sleep on their back, and all movements are prohibited.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And pause in the nature of the treatment so that it aligns with its natural state, and do not tilt their head to the right or left side at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And let the dressing be according to its disposition within the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	Then remove that from the darkened area and expose the previously obscured sight, and show them some causes, then reapply the dressing within the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And it is not necessary to do this during the time of treatments or right before the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	However, it is necessary that you do this so that the water can gently permeate through with great and vigorous attention.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	But if an abscess forms and requires cauterization, then you must remove the bandage before the seventh day and treat it with whatever is effective against the abscess.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then you should cleanse the affected area and place something on their face or the region where the swelling is, leaving it there for several days, while the condition exists in the darkened area.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And then it is gently moved from that position and turned onto its side in its causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in surgery it is not excused for the disciple to see certain things more than once, and thus you should be bold during the operation. 
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And it has already come to us from some of those who are in the Artach, and some said that they make fire in the Ayrac made of clay, which is pierced with a hole through which water is sucked.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	But however I have not seen anyone in our land who has perfected this, nor have I read this in any of the books of the ancients; and it is possible that this is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of medicines over which he who is ignorant should not preside:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they should be made of wax or of proper iron, and their extremities should have this triangular subtlety, the sharp end thus as that is the form.
Capitol .xxiv.	Capitol .xxiv.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	Here is the translation of the given line:
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose diverse growths of flesh are found, some of which are causes assembled like clusters of grapes or like a fleshy polyp; and this disease is called polypus because it resembles that kind of fleshy growth.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And if it is cancerous flesh, it appears pale and of a dark color; and that which is lion's flesh is not of a dark color. 
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in those cases where the flesh is not fraudulent nor cancerous, you should make the patient sit between your hands and place them in the sun, and unbind their nostrils, and pierce the area with a needle in those flesh areas.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then extract that which has been separated externally, and then divide what you have grasped of those with a sharp and fine spatula from one side until you know that all the flesh has been removed; so that if any part remains for which there is any reason why amputation might be necessary, then you cut away that part easily with one of the finer instruments until no such cause remains.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	And if it is governed by pus or an abscessed aposteme that has become inflamed, then you apply what is necessary; if it is one of the malignant apostemes, then you cut and cauterize that area until the blood is stopped and all the cavities are removed.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And then pour wine or vinegar into the nose near the incision.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	And if the nose is open and you can feel moisture reaching the palate, then you know that it is already healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	And if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you know that inside there is flesh that has not been properly removed, and the pus remains between the bones of the nose where the incision has not reached.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore, now it is necessary to introduce a probe into the person who has some swelling, and fill with nutshells, and place between each nutshell an amount equal to the width of a finger or thumb, and then insert one end of the probe into the nostrils either by force or by another method that is possible.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And once this has been done, that he draw his breath inward so as to reach the canals of the nose, and sit straight on his chair, for many white-clothed faces do this action in schools, and it is an easy method for those who wish to do it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then place the two ends of the catheter, one end coming out over the nose and the other remaining in the nose, and then apply a suture to the flesh with the knots that are on the catheter, and do this until you know that the flesh is already joined by the knots of the catheter.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then remove the catheter, and place near the nose during the extraction of blood a compress, and do this for three days or more until the ointment has corroded all that is rotten from the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And then at the end of the treatment, place a lead tube in the nose for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	If you decide to use drying treatment, apply that method.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument used for nasal administration with which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And make this from silver or clay, shaped like a small open lamp, similar to a small bowl, and the mouth similarly.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you wish, make a closed tube like a cane, and the tube of the instrument that serves as a catheter should be flat and open; to which you attach a handle at the rear end, with which you can heat it in oil or whatever liquid you want from among the suctionable substances and causes.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these purgatives are precious: take from the beaver's fat, white bile, ginger, saffron crocus, long pepper, cicely, and savory each one ounce. Mix them with the juice of leek and onion, make pills out of them, and dissolve a pill in tepid water, then pour it into the nostrils of the patient lying down.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	On nasal polyps in the outer parts of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Motives seen are of a certain type in the extremities of the nose, and it is magnified and swelled within several days during which time the proper care should be given to it.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And for this reason, you must incise at the beginning of its appearance and remove all of it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And then place over the area where the cautery or burning medicine is applied.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	And if the onset of the condition is delayed until it has become prominent, then consider whether it has calcified, hardened, is of dark color and has little sensation; in such cases, do not touch it with an iron instrument as it is a chronic abscess; for many have found that incising this kind of abscess can lead to great harm due to its malignancy.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the abscess is somewhat red and not of dark color, and incision is possible in all such cases, then treat the patient and incise it without fear, and care for the area with something that dries and constricts until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	On the suturing of the nose and lips and ear when continuity is disrupted by injury or a similar cause.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when you encounter a disruption of continuity in one of these cartilages, there is little confidence in such an operation unless it is performed on certain individuals.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when you encounter any cause of those wounds, you should consider if it is a fresh wound with its own blood, and then you stitch the two edges of the wound together with suture, and then care for the inside so that it may heal.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the edges of the wound are already separated and each part has healed, then you should scrape each part of its visible scab until blood comes out.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then bring the two edges together with sutures and secure them, and over them sprinkle powdered dragon's blood that has been finely ground, and place a piece of diafinicon plaster or some other consolidating plaster over the powder, and leave this dressing for two or three days, then remove it and replace the plaster until the scabs fall off by themselves, and finally treat with ointment until it is healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	The method of suturing is that you close the wound either with needles as we have described in stitching the abdomen, or you can also close the wound with thread in a way that is known to you.
Capitol .xxvii.	Capitol .xxvii.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	For the given line:
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Motaz veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras deerrs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, you must turn the lips and splits of each of those sores all around, and then fill the area with shredded sage until the blood is restrained, and then wash it with sweet wine and treat the area with something astringent, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	From the incision of the flesh attached in the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	There is a large amount of flesh attached to the gum, which ancient practitioners called alveoli. Then you must suspend it with an ounce or hold it with forceps and incise it down to its root, allowing the blood to flow freely.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	Then apply over the area some crushed sage or other styptic or cicatrizant powders.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if the flesh returns, then incise it again and cauterize it, because after the cautery, it will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	On the extraction of teeth with forceps.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth, both those inside and outside, and between the gums, there are rough scabs, plaques, and sometimes blackened areas that turn yellow or green, this leads to corruption in the gum and causes the teeth to become decayed.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And therefore it is necessary that you situate the patient between your hands and rest their head on your thigh, and file down the teeth in which you find those scales and cause likenesses of sand so that nothing remains of them, and this removes blackness and yellowness and other discolorations so they are cleansed.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Therefore, if what is at the beginning of the process is good; and if not, then you repeat the procedure on those [areas] another day and a second day and a third until it reaches the final state in which you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And you should know that teeth require various types and shapes of forceps according to what is prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And therefore, the razor with which the tooth is cut from inside is different from the razor used to cut between the teeth in other forms, and these forms of razors you should prepare, which you will see shortly:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter .xxx.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Of tooth extraction.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	You must cure the tooth of its pain with all your skill and effort in the entire process of extraction, for there is no reason to replace it once it is extracted, as it is a sublime substance within which excuses are made during its extraction. 
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	And when the patient is forced to have that tooth extracted, you must be certain which tooth is causing pain, for often the pain moves in the patient and can lead to a healthy tooth being identified as painful. If you extract that one and still the pain does not cease until the diseased and painful tooth is removed, because we have already seen this through the operations on jaws.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, you must be certain which tooth is causing pain, and once you know that well, you should scarify around the tooth using a spatula that has some efficacy until it separates from the gum entirely. Then remove it with your fingers or with fine scissors little by little until it comes out completely.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	Then take large forceps for good grip or strong extraction, and hold the patient's head between your hands firmly so that it does not move, and then pull the tooth straight out in such a way that you do not break it nor cause more pain to the patient.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And if it is not easily removed, then take one of those instruments and place it around the tooth on all sides with ease, and apply force to its removal in the same manner as at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	And if the tooth is loose or decayed, then you must wrap that looseness with cloth and tighten it at one end with a fine thread so that it does not fall out during your tightening of it. 
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And it is necessary that you work carefully with scarification around all parts of the gum and be mindful of your strength so as not to tear it or leave a part broken, and return to the patient for the harm may be greater than the original pain.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And be careful not to do what some ignorant barbers do in their stubbornness and audacity regarding the extraction of them, which is not what we have recommended; for many times they bring great illnesses upon men that are more difficult to treat, and the roots of those remain stubbornly embedded, or you must extract it along with some bones of the jaw as we have witnessed many times.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And then, for the extraction, wash the mouth with hot wine or sour wine with salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if bleeding occurs because of this, just as red spots may appear, then sprinkle some amount of egg on the wound, and if the egg does not help, apply a cautery.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The form of the forceps and delicate tongs with which a tooth is extracted at the beginning should be long on the outer end, short in handling, and thick, so that they do not bend when you use them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And they should be such that the thick handle ensures they do not bend when you grasp them firmly, and their outer ends should be short.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And they should be made of Indian iron, properly fashioned with straight ends, and at the ends of these, there should be teeth that fit into each other and grip tightly through constriction. Sometimes, the ends of these are in the shape of the beak of a bird called a ciconia, which is a stork, and they have a strong constricting power.
Capitol .xxxi.	Capitol .xxxi.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	For the eradication of teeth and extraction of the bones of the jaw that are trapped.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need to extract a tooth that is broken and some of it remains, then it is necessary for you to place something cold on the area with a bandage for one or two days until the location is softened; and then introduce forceps or tweezers whose ends are joined together in the shape of the beak of a bird called stork or spoon, the form of the forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The extremities of iron should be made钝 inside like a file or a chisel.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you do not obey this instruction using these forceps or tongs, then you must incise over the boil and scrape away all the flesh and insert the instrument called an atalis, which is a small lever of this form:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And let there be a thick extremity that is small in length, and it should not be inserted too deeply so that it does not break.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Therefore, if through this the incision is deeply penetrated, it's good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is triangular at the tip, in which there should be some thickness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second instrument is that it should be triangular and have a finer extremity.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And already with this instrument, which has two handles, the form of which is as follows:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And with other instruments, which precede in the scraping of teeth; for it is also done with this instrument, which resembles a large nail, and this is its form:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	The twisted or shortened triangular extremity should be of some thickness, and not too brittle so that it does not break.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And you should know that the instruments for moving teeth are also similar to the other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	May the skilled and subtle artisan in the art find by themselves according to what the operation and various illnesses indicate; for there are illnesses for which ancient texts did not describe or provide specific instruments, due to their diverse forms and types.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the jawbone or other bones of the mouth are fractured, or if you need to, then treat it by placing the bone back in its position using what is appropriate from the instruments and forceps we have mentioned in the extraction of tooth roots, and assist with gestures which have the following form:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And if there is any small swelling, it should be gradually reduced and either squeezed or held with the mouth so that it does not escape or flee before the bone is completely extracted; then restore the area with appropriate medicines for this purpose.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if there is a small ulcer on the bone, then scrape that ulcer and its blackness, and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	On the treatment of prominent teeth over the others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When prominent teeth do not follow their natural course and the form is loose, especially when it affects women, and particularly venerable women; therefore, you must consider: if a tooth is close to another tooth and cannot be extracted or loosened, then root out that one; but if it is not attached to another tooth, then cut it with this instrument, which has this shape; it resembles a pig's snout and should be made of Indian iron with an extremely sharp edge.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And your incision should be such that you cut it over several days due to the hardness of the tooth, and ensure that no other tooth is damaged in the process.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if a prominent tooth is exposed to filing, then file it with an Indian iron file, which has the following form:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And if it is all made of Indian iron and the needle itself; and let it be made of small pieces sharpened like a file with which needles are made, with which the tip should be filed little by little over many days with ease, so that no other tooth is worn down or damaged.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And then tie that part at the end, and shave that area with sharp razors.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if it is a tooth of which a part is broken and you injure the tongue, then you must file that inside so that the roughness of that fracture is removed and smoothed, and fill it so that the tongue is not injured nor the speech impaired.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On the restoration of damaged teeth with gold or silver filings.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When you encounter front teeth that have been displaced or loosened by impact or fall, and the patient cannot chew on what they eat, and you have treated it with astringent medicines but your treatment has not worked, then in order to prevent further issues, they should be secured with gold filings and not silver ones, because silver can corrode and loosen over a few days, whereas gold never changes.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And the filing should be of such fineness and thickness that it can enter between the teeth; the method is to take the filling and place twice as much between two healthy teeth, then increase it with two twists of the filling between the damaged teeth, or if there is one or several, until the thread reaches the healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then repeat the incision within the area where you began, and hold your hand with ease and skill so that it is not clumsy.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And let your grip be such that you pull out the tooth without it slipping.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then separate the excess bile from the extremities using forceps or tweezers, and apply those in each place with care, and place them between the healthy tooth and the diseased one, so that it does not cause injury to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then loosen that binding as tight as possible. 
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	And if it is loosened or broken, strengthen that or those with another thread in such a manner throughout its entirety.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the reaction of two healthy teeth and two decayed ones, just as you see these tied together:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when it is done that you return a tooth or two back to their respective places in the jaw, and they have grown back as we have described, and that they no longer decay.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And this is done only by skilled artisans and wise [individuals].
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And sometimes a piece of the bone of a cow is adapted, and it is made in the shape of a tooth, and it is placed in the spot where the tooth is missing, and it is fastened as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	On the condition of the ligament that affects the tongue and prevents speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament, which affects the tongue sometimes, is either natural, with which a person is born, or accidental and occurs due to an injury that has already healed.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation on him is that you open the mouth of the patient, his head being in your lap; and lift his tongue, and then cut through that nerve ligament according to the width within which the tongue is severed from its root.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	And if in that area there is any hardness or knotting, and this has occurred due to the consolidation of an injury, then you cut into it and split that area across its width between where you have divided the ligament and dissolved the knot.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And be careful that no cut is made in the skin of the flesh and that you do not split the artery here, causing a flow of blood.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And then wash the remnants of the incision with wine, or with sour wine, or with cold water; and then place a licini tongue under it; this is the method by which the patient should keep their tongue underneath each night so that it does not become consolidated again. 
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	If a flow of blood occurs, place powdered vitriol over the area; but if the bleeding continues, then cauterize the area with a red-hot cautery which is suitable for this purpose.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	Then treat it with other methods until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	On the extraction of a ranula from the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes, a swelling resembling a small tumor appears on the tongue, preventing it from functioning normally; and over time, it grows to fill the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	The procedure is to have the patient open their mouth wide in front of the sunlight and examine the swelling.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see it is of a dark or black color, hard, and the patient feels no sensation in it, then do not touch it as it is chronic.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it has turned white, indicating moisture, then insert your finger into it and incise it with a fine spatula, cutting it entirely; and if blood flows during the procedure, then apply powdered zegi, which is vitriol, over it until the bleeding stops.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then return to your work before you have fully removed it, before it is washed with sweet wine and salt; and treat that with another cure until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	The given text appears to be in an archaic or constructed language that shares characteristics with medieval Latin and Romance languages. The phrase "Capitol .xxxvi." seems to indicate a chapter or section number rather than a passage of medical advice.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	From the extraction of abscesses from both ears and that which occurs in the throat and other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When it happens in the throat area, where glands that are similar to the tonsils are located, which can be seen externally and are called two ears, when you treat them with what we have said in the division and they do not heal, then consider if the abscess is hard, of dark color, with little sensation, then do not touch it with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of red color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron because of the flow of blood; first let that remain inside until it has matured, and now either you will pull that out, or it will come out broken on its own.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of white color, like a root, and the tip of it is delicate, then that is what needs to be incised.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation on it is that you consider, before your operation, if the swelling has already rested after being completely cauterized or if it has decreased somewhat; and now make the patient sit facing the sun, with his head in your lap, open his mouth, and the servant takes hold of his tongue with an instrument of noble form, which looks like this:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And it should be made of silver or iron, and it should be sharp like a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	So as you press the tongue with that instrument and the swelling is shown to you, spit over it with your saliva, then take an ounce and insert it into the swelling, and pull it outwards as much as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And here is the translation of the given sentence:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	And it resembles forceps, however the ends of it are curved, such that the opening of each one is in line with the other, sharp at the tips, which is made of iron and well-tempered.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	But if this instrument is not available to you, then incise it with a spatula of which this is the form: And let it be sharp on one side, blunt on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And since you have incised one wound, incise the other in the same manner of incision, and then the patient will be washed with cold water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is excessive bleeding, wash it with water boiled from pomegranate peel or myrtle leaves and similar astringents until the bleeding is stopped, and then treat it until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And sometimes abscesses form in the throat or on other parts of the ears, and incise those in the same manner as I have described for incising two wounds equally.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I have already treated a woman with an abscess that had formed in her throat, which abscess tended to a dark color, was not very sensitive, and had already closed off her throat. The woman was breathing through a narrow passage, had been prevented from eating and drinking water, and was near death if it had lasted for one or two more days.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had risen so much that it was halfway between two paths from which it would burst out in two places.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Therefore, I carefully dissected it and inserted one of the needles there, and pulled that, and a large part was removed from him. Then I cut into it where I understood to make another incision, then I closed its mouth, and held its tongue, and then I placed the needle in that abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then I cut away a large part of it, and only a little blood came out.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Therefore, the swelling of that woman is absolute, and she should start drinking water immediately, then eat food. So I did not stop incising that abscess many times for a long time, and an abscess would occur in place of that one, which I continued to incise as long as it persisted.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	So I took some material and cauterized the swelling of it, thus adding to the treatment; then I wandered around and did not know what God would do about that situation near me.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter XXXVII.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	On incising a tumor when it is abscessed.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When catarrh affects the tumor, and it is abscessed and elongated, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is in a part that is thick and round, then it is called a bubo.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	However, when it is treated with what we have said in the division and you do not confirm your treatment, and you find that the abscess has already subsided and become fine, then you must incise those that are added around; and if it extends to a length where it is bloody, of dark or black color, and does not feel like that at its center, then you should attempt to incise it, for there is fear for the patient in such a case.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	When you see that [the object] according to the manner I have described regarding its whiteness and length, make the patient sit up and press their tongue with an instrument whose shape protrudes, then insert the ounce into the new [area], pull it down, and cut it using one of two instruments which are called in the incision of two halves.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And it is necessary that you do not incise beyond what is adjusted to its natural boundary with an addition, because if you incise further, you will harm their speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And then for the incision, use what we have recommended in the description of two melilots [likely referring to a medicinal herb], and care for it until it is healed. 
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the patient was frightened by the incision made on him, one must use ingenuity in the cauterization of his fear, and the manner of cauterizing is nothing more than with sharp water. You place the head of the patient on your thigh, then press his tongue with the instrument we have mentioned, and then take the water which we have specified in the chapter about cauterization, and warm it with that living cause, and place it neither too thick nor too thin, and fill the concavity of the instrument which has this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Let the extremity of it be concave as a spoon's cavity where the medicine is placed, and place the instrument with the medicine on the ulcer. The patient should lie on their side so that any saliva or mucus from the mouth of the affected area does not flow down due to this internal medicine, so that it does not descend by this cause over the throat and affect it.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	Then take your hand with the medicine and apply it to the uvula for a brief period until you see it become darkened and soothed by the action of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you want, take a cloth and wrap it around the end of the rod, and submerge the cloth in the medicine, and insert the rod with the cloth into a tube so that the cloth adheres to that tube, and do this several times until you achieve what you desire from the cauterization of the grape, and then let it dry and fall off after about three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to repeat the medicine, do so, and then for the cauterization, clean around the grape with a cloth soaked in vinegar, and modify that which is around it from the medicine, and wash it with cold water, and treat it externally with a liniment, and internally with decoctions until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this type of treatment is safer than incision and lasts longer in terms of duration.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Sometimes the uvula is cured with something more subtle than cauterization and incision, for it is treated by sublimation in this manner: take cinnamon, hyssop, origanum, rue, scichos arabic, chamomile, fennel, and similar herbs; prepare all these ingredients or some of them in a pot, and let them be submerged in sour wine, and boiled; the pot should be well sealed with good sealing wax, and there should be a hole in the middle of the pot over which is placed a concave instrument made of silver or iron.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And insert the extremity into the patient’s mouth so that the steam reaches the uvula above the tonsil, until the uvula is moved or obscured.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And then rub on those dry spots where it is dry, and be careful not to perform this treatment at the beginning of the appearance of abscesses, because it would make the abscess too tight, and you should not do that; instead, you must drain the abscess with a cautery.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	But if this instrument is not available to you, then take a reed and attach an eggshell at one end of it, so that the patient's mouth can be cleaned out, because the eggshell prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On the extraction of thorns and other foreign objects stuck in the throat and other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Dry spots adhering in the throat or fish bones or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then you must extract whatever is visible of those objects, on which you focus your sight, by pressing the tongue with an instrument in front of light, so that what is in the throat becomes clear to you.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And that which does not appear and is hidden in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because by doing this, the cause attached to the throat will be forcefully expelled through vomiting; or let the patient swallow a piece of raw radish or lettuce root or a piece of dry bread; or take a piece of dried sea sponge, and soak it strongly with honey, and then have the patient swallow that, for when it reaches the place where thorns are located and extracted, they will be forcefully expelled.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And furthermore, take an eel and wrap it in honey, place it inside and gently extract it; or take a leek, cut it up and insert it gently.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	Moreover, if they are not forcefully expelled by the methods we have mentioned, then use an instrument made of lead according to this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And it should be thicker than a small tube, and at one end, it should have a curvature that allows you to insert it into the patient's throat easily.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And lift his head up, and be careful not to touch the bones of his throat, so that you do not injure him or cause any bone or spine to be pushed inwards, or that which the doctor might accidentally insert with their hand. 
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	And although the patient himself intervenes more effectively, by his knowledge of the location of the adjacent cause and pushes into them, and pulls his hand with the instrument on them, all of this according to the quantity that is prepared for him before being bled. 
Capitol .xxxix.	Capitol .xxxix.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	From the extraction of the bloodsucker attached to the navel.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When the bloodletting is treated with what we have said in the division of the treatment with medicines and not counter-productively, consider then in the throat of the patient under the sun, since you have inspected the tongue of him with the instrument which we have recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore, if you use bloodletting, extract it with a small needle or with subtle and appropriate gestures.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible for you to extract with that, then take a concave cannula and insert that into the throat of the patient, and then place an ignited iron in the concavity of the cannula, and do this as many times (until the blood-sucking creature is dead and exits the throat) and the patient must abstain from water all day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	Then take a vessel full of cold water, open the mouth of the patient over it, and wash the mouth with it; and do not let any of it be wasted and keep pouring the water back into the vessel with their hand, for the blood-sucking creature will immediately spit out water when it feels it.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	But if it is not cured by what we have recommended, then fumigate the patient with camphor or asafoetida using the instrument we have described for the fumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, as it may help. 
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence line by line:
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not work, then you repeat the fumigation several times, and prevent the patient from drinking, eating salty or spicy foods, and do not let them drink water; thus, it is necessary that this regimen be strictly followed.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument with which bloodsucking is performed on the ear when it is seen; and it resembles forceps in this way, although there is some curvature to it:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
Capitol .xl.	The text you provided seems to be in a constructed medieval-like language that draws from Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Given this structure, let's translate the given line:
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In this passage is the summary of the discourse regarding abscesses and their incision.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And thus there are diversities in puncturing and drying them through two methods, of which one is by the type of abscesses you introduce into the body; and by that which removes the moisture.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second method concerns the areas where bodily accidents occur, for an abscess in the head is different from an abscess in the buttocks; and an abscess occurring in a fleshy part is different from an abscess in a joint; and each of them has its own treatment through operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And regarding abscesses, some of them should not be punctured until the pus is nearly mature or full within them.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	And there are other abscesses that should be treated when they are cross-shaped and not fully mature according to their fullness, such as abscesses near joints. For an abscess that approaches a joint, its nature extends into the area where you would puncture it, potentially corrupting the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing contraction of the member; or if the abscess is near a principal limb and you delay its puncturing until it is mature, it could affect the principal limb; or if it is near the buttocks, then puncture it when it is not yet fully matured; and do not pierce it while it is raw or incompletely digested, but rather when it is close to the buttocks so that its contents do not decay and spread within the internal parts of the buttocks, causing a fistula, or that it remains unresolved at its site.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	But you must know the time of the abscess's puncture, and this is when it has matured.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you must know that it is matured when there is the cessation of pain and the cessation of fever, then the reduction of heat and pulse, and the sharpness at the head of the abscess, and the other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And you must know that the puncture should be made in the lowest part of the abscess where the pus is, so that the pus comes out from the elevation.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And the puncture should always be made along the length of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in parts of the hands or feet, and in areas of veins, tendons, nerves, arteries; and finally, in all places where there is no reflection; for in those where there is reflection, use puncturing according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	But when the abscess is in a fleshy area, it is better to delay the puncture until its digestion is confirmed according to the second stage, as we have said; for if you puncture it before that, the duration of the illness is prolonged with much foulness, and the lips of it become hardened and its depth increases.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	And here is the translation of the given line:
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And it is necessary that you administer small punctures, and in large abscesses make large punctures or wide incisions according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And there are other types of abscesses in which the skin must be indented and incised; when it is done this way, like cutting bread, and once it is done, it remains thus, much like when you incise into areas of elephantiasis and buboes.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And there are those that are incised with a section having three angles; and there are those in which it is incised like the shape of a laurel leaf, such as the abscesses of the armpits.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And there are those in which a round incision and a crescent-shaped incision are administered, similar to the latter.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	But for those that are not like superficial lion abscesses, you must pierce them with a superficial or flat puncture only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the abscess is large and has already collected much pus, you should pierce it, but do not worry about extracting all the pus at once; first extract part of it, then apply a poultice to the abscess on the next day, then extract a larger portion, and repeat this process several times according to gradual extraction until it is fully drained.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And especially if the patient is of weak constitution, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old person in decline, because the animal spirit often dissolves with the discharge of pus, and the patient dies quickly, and you operate on them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Take great care with this chapter, and when you make the incision in which you puncture these abscesses, you must clean the wounds and then consider whether the wound of the abscess is small or flat. If it is a small wound or flat section, then apply ointments of lead or old pitch; and if the abscess is large and the cracks from the incision are many, then you must place lint in each area until they heal together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the abscess a part of the chain is severed or you have made it concave along its circumference, then you must compress it with old pitch or a thread made from lead cloth, just as when you draw out filth or roots, keeping them moist; strengthen that area by the third day; and then process it and treat it with whatever ointments are necessary until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	But if blood flow occurs during the time of your operation, then you should apply cold water and sweet wine to a lead cloth, and place that over the area of the bleeding multiple times.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	But if the bleeding persists, then you must administer treatment and care, using powders that I have recommended in various places throughout this book and its sections.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	And if it is during the winter season, and the place of the swelling is where sensitive nerves are located, then you must infuse pillows with wine and hot oil, and place those on the affected areas.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is summer and the areas are fleshy, then you must place poultices soaked with water and oil or with wine and oil, and all of this should be rubbed in until the third day, as we have said, and then you must open the abscess, clean it out, and administer to its treatment whatever is appropriate until it is healed.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary to know about the treatment of abscesses generally, but according to the method of distinction, I have already said about each abscess in which manner its cure should be carried out individually by chapters.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XLII.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	From the section about abscesses which appear in the nape of the neck.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the nape of the neck, small abscesses appear, and they are similar to nodes that contain tunics which are in their formation; and their type is spots.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And from them come pustules, and those contain moisture similar to slime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And from those come the ones that contain moisture similar to pus, and they resemble each other; and from those come the stony ones, which are hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all and in the extraction of those, there is no fear, because the extraction of those does not cause adverse archery [likely meant to be "artery"].
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in the section of those is that you express them with an instrument whose form is suitable for this, which is called a probe, until you know what it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	For if what it contains is moisture, then you should divide that through a longitudinal section with a superficial cut in the following manner:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And it begins in the section of the line between B and G. Thus, as the moisture is evacuated, you scrape away that skin which contains that moisture, and do not leave any cause behind, for if some cause remains, similar occurrences will return.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then immerse a cloth in Egyptian ointment, if it is available, and if not, in water and salt; and fill the wound with that and leave it inside for another day, because with this you corrode all that is rotten from that membrane.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then apply to that area Egyptian ointment a second and third time if you need it, until you are sure there is no rupture or any cause of breakage in that layer; now treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if the abscess contains fatty nodes, then you should incise it in this manner:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	using a section in the shape of a cross, and insert your fingers between the two lips of the incision and spread it out entirely, and exert your strength in extracting the membrane that contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	But if your treatment meets opposition, then do what I tell you first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly, treat the calcified abscess with incision and cure as I have told you; incising a calcified abscess is easier, for it has little blood and moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And sometimes some of these abscesses, which are on the head in some people and contain no moisture at all; the cause is that I once incised an abscess on the head of an old woman and found the abscess to be like a hard, rough, white stone, which could not be crushed, and if anyone were to hit it with that force, it would injure them.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	Here is the translation of the given sentence line by line:
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And stop the perforation of those from the lowest part of their body so that the body is relieved of pus in the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And then treat those with whatever is appropriate for that treatment.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	On the incision of scrofula that occurs in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Moisture and cold often cause these swellings in the neck and armpits; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck are often formed between the layers, and all of these scrofula are within their own proper membrane, just as in the knots and swellings of the head, as we have recounted.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the types of these scrofula are diverse, for some are stone-like, and some contain moisture, and among those there are malignant ones that do not respond to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, in the one that you find to be of good disposition upon touch, where the color of what is visible is close to the color of the swelling, and it is soft throughout, and not attached to the neck's nerves, veins, or arteries, and is not hard, you should incise that with a dry superficial cut from above to below along a line of about 6 units within a line of 2 units, and scrape that thoroughly, and extend both lips of the swelling with tweezers, or use several pairs if needed, as we have said for swellings in the head, and extract it bit by bit.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more cautious that neither the vein nor the nerves be cut.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And let the spatula not be too sharp, so that it does not injure your hand upon insertion, or disturb the patient, and cut what is not necessary to cut; for if you were to cut a vein or artery and prohibit your operation, then apply to the wound powdered vitriol or other powders which stop blood flow, and bind up the wound, leaving within that which alleviates the acuteness of the abscess and softens the wound, so that it begins to become pus-filled.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is constricted or cut off.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Therefore, return to your operation before you have completed it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then examine with your index finger if there is any cause of the other small swellings, thus incise those and clean them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is near the large vein of the swelling, then you must not incise that swelling at its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Before that, it is necessary to wrap it with a strong folded cloth and leave it in such a way that it falls by itself without harm.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the wound with old wool that you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then dress it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you incise that swelling entirely, then you must bring the two edges of the wound together and suture them immediately so that there is no remaining excess material.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that there is excess material due to the size of the swelling, then you must understand how to incise its root, remove it, and administer stitches as described.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for those swellings that contain moisture, pierce it with a superficial puncture where you see the site of maturation, and make an incision to drain the pus from the base of the swelling, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then administer punctures, using cantharides with ointment and similar substances to corrode what remains of the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And then when you see the wound already cleaned, now you cure it with an ointment of generative flesh until it is healed. 
Capitol .xliii.	Capitol .xliii.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	From the incision of the pus pocket in the axillary region.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients described this incision in the abscess, and I have not seen anyone in our land who has performed it.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the speech of those [individuals]. 
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	And for men who have hemorrhoids, it must be avoided to extract the hemorrhoid, because by doing this no healing will occur since all the veins and the larger ones of the patient are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	And in those who have abscesses caused in the mouth or throat or both ears, when the disease is not in the bone, one must use the method of incision to avoid the damage that is caused by perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, when we want to do this, we must incise the epiglottis leaving three circles of the epiglottis intact, or make four small sections across its width in the area between two such circles, ensuring that the cut is on the soft part, not on the cartilage, and this location is suitable for cutting because it lacks flesh and the blood vessels there are few.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is inexperienced, it is necessary to stretch the membrane of the throat with an ounce, and then cut the membrane until you reach the canal, but avoid the blood vessels if any are present.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	Then incise the soft tissue as we have recommended; it is indicated that the cut on the canal should be marked by the flame which comes from the substance that has been mixed and by the discontinuity of the voice.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Therefore, when the hour is unfavorable for the feared perforation, bring together the edges of the wound's membrane, and sew them with just the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that promote flesh growth where it needs to heal.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Albucaçis says that the summary of the sermon we have recounted is that some of those abscesses have blocked the windpipe of the patient, and the patient has come near to death, and their breath is cut off, and some proceed to incise the epiglottis so that the patient may breathe through the wound by some respiration, and be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And by this, you should leave the wound open until the maliciousness of the disease is consumed; and it takes three days for that maliciousness to subside; and then after that, you should close the wound, and continue to treat it until it heals.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen with my own patients is that a servant took a knife and inserted it into her windpipe and cut a part of the lung's canal. I was called for her treatment, and I found the sound she made resembled the moaning of someone dying, and upon uncovering the wound, I found blood that had seeped from the small wound.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore, it must be confessed that she had not cut any vein or artery, and the air came out of the wound, and she took care of it until it was healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And it does not harm the servant if there is no hoarseness in their voice, and after some days they return to the improvement of their disposition.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that in the section of the hernia there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	The text provided seems to be in an archaic form of a Romance language. Here is the translation for the given line:
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Of the incision over an abscess that you encounter on the groin externally, and it is called a groin hernia.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This abscess named groin hernia is a large abscess according to the body's color, and it occurs frequently in women. 
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it happens in two ways, for it can be either natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural case, it is not a matter of curing.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental occurs in two ways, one of which is similar to fatty knots, and the other way is similar to an abscess, which is caused by the obstruction of an artery, and in that case, there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And it is not necessary to apply pressure with iron except in the case where it is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you should probe that area and investigate it with your finger. If you find it similar to fatty knots and it is not suspended by any veins, then incise it as you would for knots, and extract it using what contains the flesh and bursiclam; otherwise, thoroughly examine its entire nature, and then treat the area with whatever is necessary for healing until it is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLV.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	On the section of types of knots (or nodules).
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Of nodules there are various species, and I have already said all the species of them in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And it is necessary that I recount thus the difference between a knot and a hernia as if there were doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	So I say that with a hernia there is heat and fever and violent pains within until the boiling of the excess is calmed; and complete putrefaction occurs at which point the fever, pain, and heat cease.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	However, with a knot, there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains a solid mass which is like a lion's paw in shape.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it depends on the color of the body, and its beginning is like a seed and forms just like a vein, whether larger or smaller, and they are of two types, either dry or fatty containing moisture, and the colors of the moisture are spots, as I have said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you come to the treatment of a knot, you must extract it and trace it back to its origin using a technique called intromission, the form of which will be described in the upcoming chapter.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And it is the method of investigating abscesses and all knots, which involves taking this instrument and inserting it into the most moist part you find in the abscess, and you will stir the contents little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated the core.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And then adjust your hand according to the size of the abscess, and then extract the foreign matter and examine what has been left behind in its trace.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the current humidity, of whatever color it may be, is discharged, then you incise it with a superficial section as I have said in other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no humidity left in the trace of the foreign matter, then you know that it is dry.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And dry it with a section in the shape of a cross as follows:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	As I have taught you, suspend it with weights and stretch the cord from all sides easily, and cover the skin or sack over it, if possible, and extract that pus with the knot.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to extract that pus, and sometimes because of this, you must remove it in pieces to ensure that none remains.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	For if any of it remains, whether little or much, the knot will return as before.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that some small part remains from it, then complete the wound with some sharp and strong corrosive powders and tighten the wound, and place over that which has become an abscess a cautery, and treat that with another cure until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if the knot is large, then sew the two edges of it together and treat that with something that promotes flesh growth.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	And if the pulse is contrary, or non-pulsating, then you cut and fill the area with something like trissat which is vitriol, and leave that in place for two or three days until the wound becomes pus-filled and the blood inflammation subsides; then return to incising what remains of the knot.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLVI.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	On the forms of the instruments necessary for section and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Concerning the forms of the introducers, and they come in three sizes: some are large, some are medium, and some are small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large introducer is as follows:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The way to insert a midwife is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of introducing something small is as follows:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	When made of iron, of wool, or properly reduced extremities, so that the instrument can be inserted into the abscesses.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of the experienced ones, and they are named albed, and one of those is called berid.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And of three spices, for among them are grain, flour, and a little [amount].
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of great experience, form of it:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of experienced midwife, as follows:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of little experience, form of it:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It seems like this text is written in a medieval form of a Romance language, possibly Old French or a similar variant. Let's translate the sentence you've provided:
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And you make them round, thick, like large needles with which sandals are sewn, and they are made of citrus wood, or of wood or iron, or silver, and the best ones are those made of citrus wood.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And they make use of the experience with black plumes, which they agree that by these the fistulas are opened in the cavity where they are reflected, and they are reflected with their lightness through those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And of three types, for some are long, and others medium, and others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and the constriction of it.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Form of the large lead ball:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Form of the experienced midwife with lead:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Form of the small lead instrument:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of tumors are of various types, for some are simple ones, which have only one curvature, and they come in three types: large, small, and medium.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And from these come hooked instruments, and they are of three types. 
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of those hooks having two curves, and they are of three types.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And since they have three curves, and are of three types.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all of these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	The phrase "Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:" seems to be in an old Romance language that mixes elements similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. A translation of this line into English would be:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Forma de unci simple migier:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Forma de unci orp gran:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Form of an instrument having three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Form of an instrument having three curves:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the scalpels with which the knots and abscesses are cut and excised, and they come in three types, for there is a large one, a medium one, and a small one.
Forma de scapel gran:	Forma de scapel gran:
Forma del scapel migier:	Forma del scapel migier:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Forma de scapel pauc:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The extremities of those with which the section is sharp are acute and the other extremities are not acute, and they are not placed in such a manner, but rather for the incision to be made sharply during the lancing of the nodes so as to avoid the risk of cutting into veins or nerves, and through this, the patient is healed and finds some tranquility from the heat that comes from the lancing of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of almadías (a type of medicinal preparation), and they exist in three types: large, medium, and small, as you will see.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of the large almadía:
Forma de magda migier:	Form of the medium almadía:
Forma de magda pauc:	Form of the small almadía:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	Let them be made of barley and resemble rays with which alcohol is made.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it is on the outer side that is pricked with a hidden spatula and in this way it reaches the internal and external parts when you want, as you see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spatimi (a type of instrument), which are hidden between the fingers for the puncturing of abscesses and are not noticed by the patients, and they exist in three types: large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	These are the forms of cupping vessels with which the flow of blood is drawn out, and they exist in three types: large, medium, and small; the forms of them are as follows:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut, e sian subtils.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And it is necessary for these types of cupping to be large, medium, and small, so that through those the separated blood flow can exit quickly when needed, and at the time when initially there is no medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use them to incise blood from all parts of the body, and only use them in fleshy areas, such as on the groins of the thighs and buttocks, and in the creases of the arms, and of the breasts and belly and knees, and similar fleshy moist creases.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And sometimes other small instruments resembling scissors are made in this form; with which the blood is let when performing phlebotomy, or proper incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes they are made round in this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	On the treatment of men's breasts that resemble those of women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Sometimes the breasts of some men become swollen due to the softness that begins when they are flaccid, and then the breasts swell and resemble women's breasts, becoming pendulous and full of nodules.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And to treat this condition, you must incise those areas with a lunar section as shown in this form, from line B inward to line G, then extract all the swelling, and then apply a flesh-growing medication to the wound, and then suture the two edges of the wound together, and care for it until it heals.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Here is the line-by-line translation of the provided medieval medical text:
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the incision of what needs to be cut due to the restlessness of the patient and the flow of blood, then it is necessary that you fill the wound with an ointment corrosive and leave that inside so that it corrodes what is rotten from the flesh, and then treat it until it heals.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	Of the puncturing of abscesses that come from titillation.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These swellings that come from a type of scrofula, which are hard and contain a kind of sac.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And of those which contain moisture; and those which contain moisture must be incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from the line of .G. to the line of .B. And when all that is evacuated from the abscess of the pus, then fill it with old wool and clean the inside on the other day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And then the wound should be left alone and treated with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess is from the glands of the nodes and from the scrofula, then you should incise it in the same way as we have described in the section about scrofula.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	And if the plague has spread to the point of putrefaction, then apply a cautery as we have previously described.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLIX.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	On the section of abscesses that occur due to arteries or veins.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an artery is ruptured and the chain that lies above it becomes hardened, abscesses may occur. The signs by which it is known whether inflammation and abscess are due to an artery or a vein: for when the abscess is due to an artery, it extends along the side of the body; and when you press on the abscess with your fingers, you feel a rustling sound within.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is due to a vein appears round on the surface of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And if surgery is performed on this abscess, it is a mistake, especially in those areas near the armpits, and in the elbows, and in the neck, and in many parts of the body; and it is very serious, therefore its treatment with iron should be avoided, and that which is in the extremities or head should be evaded.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	And for those who suffer from the swelling of the artery opening, make an incision along the length of the vein; then pull apart the incision with hooks and expose the artery, removing the tunics so that it is uncovered.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	Then place the needle and make it penetrate to the other side, and tie the artery with double thread in two places—this method I have taught you for the extraction of two arteries that are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	Then widen the area between two ligaments with a spatula until all the blood is drained out, and the abscess is dissolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then apply treatment that causes pus to form until the ligaments fall off; then treat it with appropriate ointments until it is healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if the abscess is due to venous obstruction, then you must hold with your hand as much of the abscess as possible using a ligature, and then insert the needle at the spot where you have held it with your hand, causing penetration; and let it be in that double thread between which you extract from the other side, and then tie off the abscess tightly according to what I have told you in binding with a double strand on both sides using the two ends of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	And if you fear that the thread will be pulled out, then insert the thread with that needle along the entire abscess from the tip of the needle first, and secure the threads at four points.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then dry the abscess at its midpoint until what is inside it has dried out, and then cut away the excess of the ligature, leaving only what is tied.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then place on it a pillow that you have soaked in wine and oil, and then administer the treatment made with plasters and ointments until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Capitul l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And the incision is made in the areas of the instep or the ankle, or in any area where joint pain exists.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a severe abscess, and its color resembles that of the rest of the body; it usually occurs in the major parts of the body, and when it becomes tight with intensity, the patient appears to be in a state of stupor.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not an aggregated abscess in the groin area of the body, and therefore a chain (or support) is placed underneath, and it causes pain all over without moving to the front or back parts.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, of those that are in the joints, it is not advisable to wrap them with iron, because it would likely cause contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	However, for those that are on the head or forehead, apply the treatment with a spatula.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	But if it is a small abscess, then take it with forceps and remove it entirely.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then suspend it with a hook, and draw out the pus, and then clean the area; sew up the wound, and care for it until it heals.
Capitol .li.	The text provided seems to be in a constructed medieval language that is heavily influenced by Latin with elements of Italian, Spanish, and French. However, ".li." at the beginning of your sentence appears to indicate a heading or section marker rather than part of a full sentence for translation. It likely means "Chapter" followed by a number (II). Here's how you might interpret it:
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Of the incision of an abscess that occurs in the abdomen. 
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Here's the translation of the given sentence line by line:
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have seen one [case], and in its belly there were two parts that resembled large fungi, and there was no difference between those white, small growths.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And already the lips of those were turned inside out and split open, and moisture was running from them all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore, I incised those and found one about eighteen inches in length and the other about six inches.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation in incising them is that you consider whether the patient is moist, and if the color of the tissue is white, moist, with a fine texture; then you incise it with a broad spatula, and have cautery irons present at the fire, for small pieces of the section will expel some blood; and if blood flows, cauterize that area.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if the patient is weak and fearful, guard against incision with iron; instead, take fresh lead plaster, and apply it to that tissue in the manner we have described; leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Then apply lead wire to the constriction; thus, do not stop applying the large lead until it is severed and falls off on its own.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	But if the tissue is of a thick texture, then there is cause for fear and terror in its incision, especially in that which is in the abdomen.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	However, it is possible to cut through half of it, and then cauterize the area so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then treat that which is inside so that the plague may be healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And be careful not to assume that you should incise a part that is of dark color, with little sensation, and of lesser regard, for that is cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And come with a reminder of pain close to that. 
Capitol .lii.	Capitol .lii.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	For the given line:
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	The prominence of the navel is caused by various reasons; either due to fractures in the spine that lies above the abdomen, and you should remove the membrane or intestine according to what has been said about other ruptures; or due to blood flowing from a vein or artery as previously mentioned, or due to trapped air within it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	But if it is due to a fracture in the spine and the tearing of the membrane, then the color of the swelling resembles the color of the body; there is no pain, and soon it appears in various positions.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then its position differs more significantly from what we have described before. When you press on it with your fingers, it becomes hidden, and then returns. It moves strongly within itself, and there is much movement at the entrance of the bowel and intense labor.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	But if it is due to moisture, then there is no pain, and it does not hide when pressed with your hand, nor is it constrained or swollen.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is due to blood, then with these signs, the swelling appears with a darkening color.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	And if it is due to soft flesh, then it is a severe abscess, large and hard, and it is implanted according to a certain quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	But if it is due to gas, then the touch of it is fierce (like a lion).
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation on it is that you should consider whether the protrusion of the navel is due to arterial blood, or venous blood, or gas; therefore, you must abstain from treating it, for there is fear and danger as I have taught in the chapter where I discussed abscesses caused by arterial and venous blood.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the protrusion of the navel is due to the intestine or the membrane, then you must command the patient to hold their breath and lie extended; then carefully probe around the entire circumference of the navel; then order them to lie face up between your hands on their back; then encircle it with a spatula around the circumference of the navel where you probed with the probe; then extend half of the abscess upwards with a large finger; then bind it around with strong bandage or linen in an appropriate manner.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And then break open the center of the abscess spread over the ligament and insert your finger into that area; search for the intestine; and if you have found or seen it through the ligament, now you should cut around it and push the intestine towards the inner parts of the belly.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found the membrane, now take that with your fingers; and cut away the excess parts of it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	But if it is against an artery or vein, now circle around that area, and then continue with your procedure; take two needles and put strong threads through them, and insert the two needles into the circle you have made around the abscess in a cross-shaped manner, making sure they penetrate; then hold the abscess tightly in four parts with the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, remove the needles and allow the area inside to let the extended flesh rot and fall off by itself; or cut away that which is thin and can be removed, and then treat it with ointments until it heals.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the prominence of the navel is due to flesh growing in it or from moisture, now you must hollow out the abscess as we have said and drain the blood or moisture that you find within it, and then treat it with what is necessary so that the area consolidates and heals.
Capitol .liii.	Capitol .liii.
De curacio de cranc.	Of the treatment for hernia.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already mentioned, in the division, about types of hernias and how they are treated with medicines, and what is necessary for the treatment to avoid iron so that it does not ulcerate; and we have said that a hernia can be generated in the thigh and precautions for its treatment.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancients said that sometimes cancer is in a place where it is possible to eradicate it, such as cancer that is in the breasts or in the thigh and similar parts of the body allocated for extraction of the whole, and especially when it starts small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it is old and large, it is not advisable to approach it, for I have not been able to cure anyone of that kind nor have I seen others who have succeeded in this.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation on it is when it is allocated as we have said, that you precede and leave the patient to be purged of black bile several times, and then incise that area if a noticeable swelling is found.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient with preparations in which they are placed for surgery, and then proceed to use hooks that are necessary for this; and then scoop out thoroughly from all sides with a good sharp instrument until no root cause remains.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the blood flow, and do not cut lightly, and squeeze the areas, and clean the thick blood completely with your hand or with an appropriate instrument.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If thick blood causes obstruction in veins or arteries, then cauterize it until the flow of blood is stopped, and then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	It seems like you've provided a section or chapter marker, specifically "Capitul .liv.", which appears to be using Roman numerals. In this case, ".liv." translates to 54 in Arabic numerals. So, this likely refers to Chapter 54 of a text. If you have any specific content from this chapter that needs translation or explanation, feel free to share it!
De curacio de ydropici.	The phrase "De curacio de ydropici" translates to:
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already discussed, in the division, of the types of water-related dropsy and the signs of each type, as well as the treatment with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured with iron is only the type of dropsy called althitas, and it is not treated with iron for the type of timpanites or the type of yposarcha, for that would be fatal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have already treated this type of dropsy called timpanites with medicines and your treatment does not provide comfort, then consider, for if the patient has already become weak, or is suffering from another illness or a different kind of dropsy, such as in his cough or abdominal swelling similar to these, then beware of treating him with iron, for there is fear over this.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	But if you find the patient to be of abundant strength, and he suffers from no other illness except this dropsy alone, and is neither a child nor an elderly person, then the method of the operation is that you lift the patient between your hands, and another minister beside him presses his abdomen with their hand, forcing the water towards the area below the navel, and then take a spiny spatula according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	Here is the translation of the provided line:
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider if the generation of dropsy is from the intestines, because at this time you must make an incision and move away from the navel by the length of three fingers to the sides, on the right side towards the pelvis.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	And if the generation of dropsy is due to a disease of the liver, then your incision should be on the left side of the navel by three fingers.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of it is due to the spleen, then your incision should be on the right side. 
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And it is not necessary for your incision to be on the side on which the patient wishes to lie because the superfluities do not run to that place freely.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then pierce the entire hernia with the instrument, and insert into that section, and lift your hand with the spatula between the hernia and the skin, and you should squeeze it out; and the quantity should be about a fingernail or so.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then pierce the skin until the spatula reaches the empty space, which is where the fluid is located.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then extract that and insert an instrument of which this is the form:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	And it resembles a thin silver tube; it is made of silver or iron or lion's brass, at the lower end of which there is a small hole, and on the sides of it are three holes: two on one side and one on the other side; and the tip of it is incised in the manner of a pen, as follows:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the upper end of it is a ring, so that when the instrument reaches the fluid, you can immediately place this ring on the instrument, thus evacuating only a small quantity of fluid, because if you evacuate more than necessary at once, the patient may die from the resolution of their animal spirit, or you might cause a near-death situation.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And then extract the instrument, and catch the water which is caused to be retained by the chain that catches the shaft which is on the syringe and bent in such a way that you pierce according to that manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then repeat the procedure on the other day if the patient can tolerate it, and extract a small quantity of water, and do this for several days in succession, and be careful to avoid mistakes until only a little water remains.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	And if you are concerned about the patient and leave a large quantity of water remaining, then treat it by burying it in hot sand, induce sweating in a bath, and expose it to the sun for a long time; and treat it with drying medicines until healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize on the stomach, and the spleen and the liver before the extraction of the water, as I have recounted in what precedes.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter LV.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	On the treatment of children who are born with unperforated urinary openings.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Sometimes some of the children are born from their mother's womb with their urinary opening not perforated (or it is very narrow or not in its proper place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, it is necessary to puncture with a subtle sharp spatula as soon as it is born according to this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then place in the wound a thin lead clamp and tie it there, and leave it for three days or four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when it is time for urination, he should be turned so that he can urinate; then return him to his original position.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not stop the flow, it is possible that the urine passing over the area will not clear this wound.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	But the one for whom the tube is narrow should be treated with a lead probe, as we have said, for several days until it is widened.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	But in those where the tube is not in its proper place, as mentioned, the cause is that for these individuals, from birth, the tube deviates at the end of the head of the penis, so they cannot urinate properly unless they lift the penis with their hand to direct it upwards; and this does not allow for proper generation, because the sperm cannot reach the mother correctly, which is a significant ailment.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the method of the operation is that the patient should be placed face down on his back, and then extend the head of the penis with your left hand using strong traction, and incise the end of the head of the penis at the site of the constriction with a sharp spatula, as if making an incision like that on a feather, or shave off some part so that the tip becomes similar to the head of the penis and the tube falls into its proper place as needed.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And be careful in your operation for blood flow, when you often encounter this; and apply yourself to it so that you stop the blood, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	The given line is:
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Of the disease that occurs in the foreskin at the head of the penis, and from corruption and blackening and adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Motives for translating this text line by line into English:
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And of those, one is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	And for the non-malignant one, you must suspend it with a fine thread and cut out the part that causes all the damage; then apply a poultice soaked in Egyptian ointment over it; afterwards, treat it with Diafinicon ointment until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the swelling is malignant and of a certain color, then you must apply a cautery near its beginning and root.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	And if the swelling is on the foreskin of the uncircumcised penis, and one part of the swelling is inside the foreskin while the other part is outside, then you must remove the part of the swelling that is inside at its beginning until it is stabilized; then treat the part that is outside, because when you treat the part along with the foreskin, it is not certain that it will not be torn.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And we have seen accidents in the genitalia and foreskin involving blackening and corruption; therefore, you must excise everything that has already turned black or is about to corrupt or is already corrupted; then apply a poultice over it with honey, which is mixed with powdered pomegranate rind and crushed, sieved ashes.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And then treat that with another treatment until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	And if there is a flow of blood, then administer a lunar cautery according to this method:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	For a beneficial cautery is used for two conditions simultaneously, that is, for blood flow and for the plague when it is corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the penis is corroded and completely destroyed, then you must insert a lead catheter into the foreskin so that the patient urinates through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adherence does not occur except in one whose foreskin is tight, and circumcision is not required; and when adherence occurs due to disease or abscess), you must scrape with a blunt spatula until the bond is dissolved and the head of the penis is completely released.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to distinguish those precisely, then you must scrape with a spatula some of the cause from the head of the penis and the foreskin, and this is why the foreskin, when it is thin, is easily perforated slightly due to its fineness.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a sharp, thin instrument, which has already been soaked in cold water so that they do not adhere again.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then it should be treated with astringent wine until it is healed.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter LVI.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	On the cleansing of children and the treatment of what may occur to those who undergo circumcision.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution to discontinuity like other wounds; however, since it is part of our operation and our will, and those for whom it is properly performed are mainly children, it is necessary that we assign the best procedure and the least harmful method to ensure their health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books because it was not part of their laws. This has been acquired through experience, which is why I have found that most artisans and barbers use circumcision and cleansing with a lancet and cautery; they also use dressings with honey and ointment with oil.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have tried all these methods and did not find a better modification than with scissors, with a ligature with fire that in the modification like a nail, for often you remove the skin above more, for the skin of the foreskin has two layers, and remains the layer below, and it is easily forced into another incision and certain pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And with the cleansing which is performed by catheterization, and it is digital, which barbers use, the incision at the end of the male member is not safeguarded, for it strongly enters into its channel.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	And in an operation with a splinter, if you force it, you will corrupt your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the birth canal of the child is short by nature, and many times births occur in such a manner that no modification is necessary, and I have seen this.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	Here is the translation of the given sentence into English:
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	The method of the first operation is that you should place the child mostly if it is one of those who understand a little, that you only tie the cord on its penis just enough, and leave it until the next day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then make him cheerful in every way that is possible for you so that he receives his treatment willingly.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then place that person between your hands properly prepared, and do not be careless; and hide the scissors in your hand or under your foot so that the child does not see those nor any other of the instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then insert your hand into the penis and blow into the tube, and pull it inside so that the head of the penis is seated, and then clean that from whatever filth has been added to it.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then mark the area with a double layer of wax, and then place another ligature slightly below that one, and then use your finger to press and indicate the site of the ligature firmly, and incise between the two ligatures.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then lift the tube slightly and extract the head of the penis; and then let the blood flow slowly, which is better; and apply powder on top, and over the powder place a cloth in which egg white beaten with warm water and mixed with fresh rose oil is spread; and leave that on for until the next day; and treat it with treatment until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The form of the scissors for modification is as follows:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	When the outer parts are not cut and the others are cut, so that the key branch is not removed, and the length of the two sharp ends should be equal to the length of two equally sized handles.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	And the error in purification is that you completely or partially evade the intrinsic chain of the incision.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, you must stretch that area with your fingernail before the inflammation of the place and incise it according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then extract that with tweezers and incise it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	And if three days have passed and the swelling remains under the foreskin as an abscess, then you should wait until the abscess matures, and then easily drain it, and incise it according to your preparation.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And be careful of the head of the penis, for it should not be affected by that.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And therefore treat it with what consolidates the wound, using powders which we have mentioned in the section on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is incised too deeply on the scrotum and you proceed to separate the parts above, this should not harm him.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And furthermore, treat it with what we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter LVIII.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction made by stones or frozen blood, or pus or flesh growths, and similar to those we have mentioned regarding the methods of treatment in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved and there is retention due to a stone that is already in the neck of the bladder, then the patient must be bent over their knees.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And then position the feet of that person on their back and extend their abdomen from the part above their back, and the patient holds their own side as much as is possible for them.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Therefore, when the neck of the bladder is forced to expel the stone towards the back areas, thus the urine is released. 
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it is not dissolved by what we have said and the cause becomes very severe for the patient, then you must administer extraction from him using an instrument called a syringe, of which this is the form: It should be made of silver and its tube should be thin like a bird's quill with a fineness equal to that of a palm and a half, and it should have a fine needle at its end.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the method of urination extraction is as follows: take the catheter folded and tie it to one end of wool or cloth with a good knot; insert the ends of the catheter into the opening left by the foreskin, and cut away any excess wool with scissors if necessary, but forcefully insert it into the tube; then introduce the catheter with force and egg white.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And lay the patient on a sheet, and wash the bladder and penis with moist oils, olive oil, and warm water.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then introduce the catheter easily so that it reaches the root of the penis; and then bend the penis upwards to the part near the navel; and then push the catheter further in there; and then continue pushing until it reaches the bladder, which should be felt by the patient reaching its destination, and if this is not done in this order, but the path through which it goes is tortuous.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then slowly extend the thread with the wool little by little, for the urine will soak the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Then remove it and use the urine for treatment, and continue using the catheter until the bladder is evacuated and the patient finds relief.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter .59.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	On the quality of cyst irrigation using clamped instruments and similar tools that are appropriate for this procedure.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When you encounter ulcers or abscesses in the bladder, or congealed blood within it, or if there is a restricted discharge, and you wish to instill water and medicines into it, then use an instrument called a clampcedra, and this is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	And here is the translation of the given line:
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that way three wounds are made: two from one side, thus as you see.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning is the concave area in which what is expelled is located and it depends on the quantity that obstructs it; without addition, within this when any cause pulls from the humidities, it is drawn, and when it is expelled, along with that it is pulled, and when it is expelled long, according to how it acts like clampcedra in which naphtha is thrown into the battles of the sea.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, if you want to extract fluid from the bladder, insert the end of a tube into the fluid, and pull with that what is pushed up into the parts above, for the fluid is drawn into the hollow of the tube.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	Then insert the end of the tube into the urethra as we have recommended in circumcision; then push the fluid with what you use to push, for that fluid reaches the bladder quickly, and the patient feels it.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The form of the catheter used to catheterize the bladder is as follows:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it should be made of silver or brass, with the tip resembling a small feather, and leave a hollow inside.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	Then take the bladder of an animal, and place in it the fluid that you want to introduce into the bladder, and then tie both ends tightly with double thread, and warm that fluid over fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	Then insert the end of the catheter into the urethra.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then press your hand on the bladder with moisture, applying structured pressure so that the patient feels that this moisture has already reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	And if the bladder is not present, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle from it; pierce that completely around its roundness; then insert strong pitch into those holes, so that it is smeared; then add the circle as though it were added to an ointment, so that you can place it in the water or moisture, oils and waters, that you want to use.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then attach it to the instrument and use it in the same way as you would with the bladder, applying pressure with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter 60.
De extraccio de peyra.	On the extraction of stones.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already mentioned in the division the types of stones and their treatment with medicines, and the difference between stones formed in the kidneys and those formed in the bladder, and the signs of each.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have said about the stone in which the operation is performed by hand, and section.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that which is fixed in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And I am narrating this with clear exposition and abbreviation.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore, it is said that the stone generated in the bladder mostly affects children; and one of the signs of this is that the urine excreted from the bladder is similar to water in its fineness, and appears as sediment; and the patient rubs his penis, often feels pain, and then urination occurs; and with this, you will find fragments of those [stones] in the feces.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And purging is the treatment for children under fourteen years who have this condition; and it is a difficult treatment in older individuals.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	However, in younger individuals, it is somewhat better because they are among those [who can be treated].
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And for the one in whom the stone is larger, the treatment is more difficult; and if it is small, it is contrary to that [situation].
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, when we come to the treatment of this condition, we must begin by cleansing the patient with a catheter that extracts all the sediment present in their intestines; for that sediment often prevents the discovery of the stone during examination.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then the patient should be lifted by their feet and shaken vigorously up and down so that the stone descends into the neck of the bladder, or jumps from place to place several times.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then place that censer between your hands, prepared, and the patient's hands should hold their own belongings, so that the bladder is entirely made to incline towards the areas below. 
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then purify that and all of that externally. 
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Therefore, if you feel a stone in the space, then you should immediately address it with incision over it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you do not completely remove your touch, then it is necessary that you anoint with oil your left index finger if the patient is a child, or your middle finger if they are a young adult, and insert that into their anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And you need to remove the stone that remains under your finger.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And slowly insert it into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	Then press on it with your finger and expel it from the area where you made the incision.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the attendant to press the bladder with their hand; and command another attendant to extend the testicles upwards with their right hand, and with their other hand, push down the cord that is below the testicles, away from the site where the incision is made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then insert a sharp instrument with the following form:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And cut into him that which is between the buttocks and the thighs, not in the middle, but closer to the left side; and let the incision be made over that stone with your finger in the buttock, and make a transverse incision so that the outer part of the incision is wide and the inner part narrow according to how much the stone protrudes from him as possible, and not more, because you will compress it with your finger which is in the buttock, and the stone should be forced out by necessity.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that some stones have angles and edges, which make the extraction difficult because of them.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And of those, some resemble a grain and are round, making their extraction easier.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Therefore, for those that have angles and edges, insert it into the fissure.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not expelled in this way, then you must apply pressure to it or stretch over it properly with an edge similar to a file with which you press on the stone, and do not let it slip away; or insert underneath it a delicate instrument with a curved end.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	And if you cannot proceed with that, then widen the incision slightly, and if you see blood flow, staunch it strongly with ground glass.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	If there is more than one stone, then at the beginning you press your hand to the mouth of the bladder, and then incise over it; and then push a little toward that area; and similarly act if they are more than two stones.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the stone is very large, then it is ignorance to incise with a large cut, because you cause one of two outcomes for the patient: either they die or they become subject to continuous urine dripping, because the area is not fully consolidated.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	However, administer the expulsion of what is dislodged inside, or use scissors to fragment it so that you can extract it in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Thus, once you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with aloes and dragon's blood, and strengthen it accordingly.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place over it a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in rose oil and warm water, so that the swelling may be easily reduced.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Then recline the patient on their back, and do not remove the bandage until the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when you have loosened that area, wash the place with water and some oil, then treat it with a defluxion ointment and an antibacterial ointment until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	And if in the wound an abscess occurs which is hot, hard, and corrosive, and it looks as though the blood has frozen in the bladder, thereby blocking urination (and this is known by the passage of blood with urine), then insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if left, it can cause corruption and putrefaction of the bladder.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then wash the wound with sweet wine, water, and salt, and apply an opposing treatment to all kinds of conditions, using what is appropriate for its healing until it is cured.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And throughout the entire healing process, you must keep both thighs open and apply the medications that are placed on the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and is in the meat of the penis, embedded within it, and urination is blocked, then treat it with what I recommend before resorting to surgery, as many times this condition is wrongly accused of requiring surgery; and now I have explained this, which is that you should take an oiled iron probe, of which this is the form:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	From the given context and linguistic similarities, it appears that this text is a medieval medical treatise written in an old Romance language. Here's my attempt at translating the line:
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And then take honey, and anoint with it that part of the penis below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then insert the instrument into the penis, penetrating easily until the perforator reaches the stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And rotate the perforator with your hand on that stone little by little, and you pierce through until the other end penetrates; for the urine is immediately released.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then press your hand on that which is broken off from the stone from the outer part of the penis, for it is crushed and expelled with the urine, and the patient is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	But if this treatment is not suitable for you due to some reason that prevents you from performing it, then anoint honey below the stone and more honey above the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then incise over the stone on that penis between two ligatures.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then extract it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then loosen the bandage and modify the clotted blood that has formed in the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to have a bandage of wax under the stone, except to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and another bandage on top for that reason, because when the wax is loosened near the protrusion of the stone, the chain returns to its place and covers the wound.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for this reason, when you remove the wax above, it is necessary that you lift the chain to the parts above, or return its original shape, and cover the wound as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter LXI.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the extraction of stones from women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Stones in women are rarely formed.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	But if a stone does occur in any of them, then the cure is difficult, and it is prohibited by many methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One reason is that the woman's urethra is too narrow.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that you do not find a woman sufficiently knowledgeable to confess herself to the doctor when she is chaste, or among women who have husbands.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is that you will not find a woman well versed in this art, especially in this operation with hand.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the site of the incision above the stone in women is distant from the location of the stone itself, for which you need a deep incision, and there is fear [of complications].
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	But if necessity compels you to do this, then it is necessary for you to take a woman who is very skilled in the matter, though such women are rarely found.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	But if you are deprived of that, then seek someone who is very skilled and subtle, or present a woman of experience well versed in the affairs of women, or a woman who has considerable knowledge in this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Therefore, present that person, and command them to do everything you instruct, starting with the examination of the stone; this is done to determine if the woman is a virgin, then they must insert their finger into her genital area to examine the stone. 
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Therefore, when you find that spot, press it with your finger, and then command the patient to step on that spot.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	But if she is not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the patient’s vagina and feel for the stone, while placing her left hand on the bladder, and compress it with good pressure.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Therefore, when you find it, you must gradually pull it from the opening of the bladder towards the area below with all your strength until you bring it to the root of the thigh.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	Then step on that area, placing yourself in the middle of the vagina from the root of the thigh on whichever side is blocked, and push the stone into that area, ensuring that your finger does not slip off the stone while pressing it.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the incision should be small at the beginning; then insert the probe into that incision, and if you feel the stone, adjust the incision according to the amount you know will allow the stone to be expelled from there.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And know that stone species are various: for among those there is one that is small and large, and sharp and rough, and long and round, and having ridges.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore you know which spices are for it by what you mean by what you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you see blood flow, apply powdered vitriol to the location and leave it for an hour until the bleeding is stopped, and then return to your operation once the stone has been expelled.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And have prepared with you the instruments which are used in the extraction of stone in men, so that you may be assisted by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you see a flow of blood and know that the bleeding comes from an artery that has been cut, then place powder on the area and press it with cushions and tight bandages; do not repeat this action; leave the stone and do not remove it, for the patient will likely die otherwise.
E aprop cura la plagua.	Then treat the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	When the sharpness of the blood has subsided over several days and the area has dried, then you return to your operation before the stone is completely expelled.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter sixty-two.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On the section of an incarcerated hernia.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	An incarcerated hernia is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white sac, which is below the spermatic cord containing the testicle, and this sac is named the tunica vaginalis.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And sometimes it is in the proper panniculus that nature prepares for it in the part of the egg, between what has been cooked and what is another egg; and it is the chain of generation between the white substance we have mentioned, and this is not other than semen.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which affects the genital areas, because this material accumulates in those regions, and sometimes it occurs due to impact on the genital areas.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this humidity has various colors, for the color of it may incline to yellow or to bloody, or red, or it is black and feculent, or it is white and watery, and this is what exists.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which it is known where this aggregation of water is as follows: for if it is in the white cypress we have mentioned, then the swelling is round declining a little lengthwise like an egg shape, and the generative organ appears swollen because the moisture comes from all sides.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the humidity is in the actual fat layer, then the abscess becomes round with parts resembling an egg, and for this reason it is thought to be another kind of egg.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the humidity is between the testicles and the scrotum, then apply the salve there.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And when you want to know the color of the humidity, then observe the color of the humidity in the swelling with a probe whose shape is as described; and according to what is seen on the tip of the probe, judge what is inside it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	When we come to the treatment of anemia, then it is necessary to instruct the patient to be well-hydrated if that is possible for you, and turn the body of the patient completely. 
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And then lay them down on their back on some kind of support slightly elevated, and place a soft cloth underneath.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then sit on the left side of him, and command the assistant to stand on his right side, who should extend his arm from one of the two sides towards the groin and to the part near the navel.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a wide spatula and split the groin along the middle length towards the penis.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And the incision should be made exactly equally distant from the line where you will cut the skin of the groin, until it reaches the white membrane enclosed.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And evert that area, observe it, and be careful not to penetrate it; and when you evert it with your instrument, ensure that it is suspended with the most delicate and subtle probing according to what is possible for you.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then puncture the watery sac with a wide incision, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate the two lips of the incision with hooks, and extend the penis upward; and do not touch the chain that holds the testicles together, and incise the penis in whatever manner is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And you should incise it entirely or in pieces, especially its thin side, for if you do not examine the incision meticulously, there is no guarantee that the fluid will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	However, if during your operation you process it from outside its chain, then after you have completed the incision of the penis, return it inside, and then suture the two lips of the chain of the testicles together, and then treat it as you would other wounds until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the prostate corrupted by another disease, then you must ligate the vessels that are near the suspensory ligaments, extract the prostate, and then treat it as we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	However, if the fluid is accumulated in two separate parts, then you should know that there are two hernias; therefore, incise that part equally as you did in the other one; and if it appears to you that an operation is needed, then perform it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then you clean the blood and insert into the incisions wool soaked in oil or oiled wool; and place on top other wool which you have soaked in wine and oil, and spread that over the groins and the navel of the belly; and place above folded cloths and pillows, and bind those above with a bandage which is according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And then two cloths are taken and filled with carded wool according to this shape; and the ends are made with which pressure is applied using a stick or wet wool, and they are attached with a structure in the waistband of the pants, and one end goes between the buttocks, and the second at the crotch area, and two ends over each thigh and two other ends over each knee, and all the structure should be tightened in the waistband of the pants.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with a cautery instead of surgery with a knife; and you should take a subtle knife-shaped cautery and incise the chain of the groins with it, and ignite it as we have recommended until the white membrane containing the fluid is exposed, and then you take a cautery according to this form:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	And it is similar to Greek letters.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then pierce with that awl, and it should be done so that all the moisture is expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then extend the awl with hooks, and suction with hooks, and carefully cauterize with a subtle fire; and incise as much as you can until you remove it all; and be careful of the area so that the fire does not touch it.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is safer and causes less blood flow, and is better than an operation with incision.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if during the operation or during cauterization, inflammation, bleeding, or other complications arise, then you must treat those complications accordingly, using the appropriate treatment as described.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the patient is weak and does not tolerate a second operation due to its severity, then administer piercing as I recommend here; this is when it is certain, based on what we have said about the symptoms, that the hernia is acute.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then you must have the patient sit on some raised stool, then pierce the inflammation at its lowest part with a broad spatula, and maintain the piercing according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And let there be a wide opening through which all the water flows out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Then place your hand over the area and press it, allowing the remaining water to flow out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Then treat that area until the plague is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	However, if there is an obstruction to the discharge of water at that time, you should pierce it. This is done only when white pus in the openings of the wound obstructs and prevents the flow of water. At this point, you must introduce a probe or instrument into the wound with which the water from dropsy can be extracted, as previously described; or apply a small device to the compression of the wound.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And know that the water returns and accumulates again after about six months or around that time. When it accumulates again, pierce it according to the same method, so that the patient may thus spend their days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter LXIII.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	On the surgical incision for a fleshy hernia and its treatment.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Here is the translation of the given line:
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I remember the operation in that case and the specifics of the abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Thus, I say that abscesses form in bodies where the humors are mixed, and this happens for various reasons: either due to an excess of sharp and bitter fluids that are poured into the humors, or by percussion.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and it is not accompanied by pain, and it is a severe abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And often the abscess is hardened, of which the color is dark, and there is no sensation in it.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes it is caused by the coagulation of the arteries and the inflammation of those, thus the memory of it is already perceived, or by the inflammation of the veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	But that which is caused by the inflammation of arteries is known by the dispersion of the abscess when you press it with your fingers; and it should not be touched.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	But that which is caused by the inflammation of veins does not disperse when pressed with your fingers.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that on this type of tissue a section may be made and also on other flesh; thus you incise the cord of the testicles, then stretch the scrotum upwards, extract what is inside the white membrane, release the suspensory ligament of the vessels, tie them off, and then cut the suspensory ligament after you have released it from all parts of the scrotum.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	And if the scrotum is already consolidated with those fleshy parts, then you must extract the scrotum and incise it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adhesion due to any cause within the membrane, or between the vessels, then you must release all of that adhesion and incise it with a circular incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	But if there is a growth of flesh in the area of the adhesion that is behind, then you must incise all of that which belongs to it and extract the scrotum as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Thus when your operation is complete, then fill the wound with wool infused in oiled and wine-soaked dressing; then care for it with other treatments until it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	Capitol .lxiv.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	For the given line:
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	Vit is an abscess wrapped in some sort of membrane resembling a bruise with swelling of the testicles, and it makes difficult any physical exercise or walking for the patient. 
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this illness, it is done out of fear of that which is preceded by memory.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, it is necessary that we speak of the operation in which they perform the first steps.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And it says that you must place the patient on an elevated chair; and then pull up the suspensor of the testicles to their places; and then tie the cord of the genitals with your teeth using probes that are proven for the penis; and let those other ministers like you, extend them with a vehement extension.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then incise with a sharp spatula through a transverse section in the area where the vessels are exposed.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then thoroughly squeeze in the same way we have described for extracting an artery that is in the temple.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then insert a needle with double thread into those areas, and tie it at the first place where you make an incision, and tie it again at the last place.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then incise those at the midpoint with a straight cut according to the length of the body, and extract what is accumulated from the foul and corrupted humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then treat the wound with a treatment for other wounds in which you want pus to be generated so that the vessels fall off, one of two kinds, for it is not harmful by doing so.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	But if you make an incision into all the vessels, then either the testicles must be extracted or the testicles must wither along with the vessels, for they are deprived of all nourishment due to the vessel incisions, and they should be removed or allowed to wither so that they do not remain connected in that manner.
Capitol .lxv.	Capitol .lxv.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Here is the translation of the given line:
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The appearance of this hernia is due to a section that extends into the spine stretching over the abdomen from the area near the groin, so that the intestines, because of that rupture, reach towards some of the other intestines.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the spine or due to the straining of him, and these two types occur due to various causes: by impact, by jumping, by crying, by lifting something heavy, or by similar actions.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	The sign of this condition, when it is due to extension of the hip joint, is that it occurs gradually over a long period and not suddenly, and it is an abscess that forms within where the groin compresses the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of it is when it occurs due to the bladder, for at the beginning it causes a sudden severe pain; and there appears a swelling different from the usual appearance of the lower back, and this is due to the protrusion of the intestine, and the body part outside the bladder is affected.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And sometimes the intestine pushes through the membrane, and this type of intestinal hernia is called zirbal.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And sometimes it is caused by gas, and sometimes the intestine splits open, and here it gets trapped, causing great distress to the patient, and sometimes it leads to severe and significantly worse pain when pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of this kind of illness with iron, there is fear, so it must be avoided in such cases.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the method of the operation for this is that you command the patient to push the intestine with their hand back into its cavity; if it obeys and returns, then have them lie on their back between your hands and lift their chest.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then stretch the cord which is the cord of the testicles above, and incise the cord of the testicles entirely along its length; then insert two hooks into the edges of the incision according to what is needed to open the incision with those.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the section is according to the amount that it is possible for you to remove from that area of the wound.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then expose that sac in which the cord of the testicles is placed, until the white hard part of each side is revealed.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	And then you insert your finger into the area where the testicle is located, between the white sac that holds the spermatic cord and the second sac, separating them from the adhesion that is behind the testicle.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	Then grasp the spermatic cord of the testicles with your hand towards the outer parts, and with this action extend the white sac upwards with your left hand, and lift the testicle with the sac to the section area; and command the assistant to stretch the testicle upward while you dissolve the adhesion behind it completely.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And feel with your fingers to ensure there is no cause for the intestine being wrapped in the hard white sac.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	But if you find any cause for it, then you push that part back into the abdomen.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then you take a needle on which a thick thread made of seven threads is attached, and insert it through the back of the white sac, which is below the spermatic cord, at the section area; and then cut the ends that protrude from the thread until four threads remain, and arrange some of them in a cross shape; and tie tightly the sac we mentioned that holds the spermatic cord with strong knots on both sides.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then wrap the extremities of the veins and bind them tightly with a strong ligature so that none of the vessels through which blood flows can pass any harmful substance, to prevent an abscess from forming there.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And place another ligature according to the position of the first ligature, about three fingers away from it; then between these two ligatures, leave the part that is below the cord connecting the testicles with a length equal to that of a finger, and cut off all the remaining part circularly, and remove the scrotum.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then make an incision below the cord connecting the testicles, such that blood and pus flow from this section, as we have described in what we have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then apply wool submerged in oil and place it on the wound; administer the ligature as we have described (and sometimes the white cord is cauterized, which we mentioned near the incision to prevent blood flow, since this often happens), and leave the ligature until it falls off by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	But if the binding of it is delayed, then bathe it with warm water and place it on the area until it falls off as we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the wound with another method of treating wounds until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter LXVI.
De hernia ventosa.	From this line:
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, none has been seen who has dared to treat it with iron.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first ones said that it is done thus as we have recounted in the hernia that occurs with fluid; which is to say that you tie the vessels near the section where it is easiest for him; and then dry in the middle place around the abscess using what opens that, between which the vessels fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And treat the plague as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter LXVII.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Of the disruption that is caused in the ankles.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Sometimes, as we have said, a rupture occurs in the ankles, and you must examine the area.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And do not attribute any cause of the hernias to the groin; and if you do, it is minimal; and it returns at all times. 
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	And if this process is prolonged, a precise incision is made in the scrotum through which you let the intestine descend into the scrotum; and this happens due to the stretching of the scrotum, which occurs as we have said, because the scrotum stretches, and then softens, and the area becomes inflamed and protrudes.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the treatment of it is with cautery, as was mentioned earlier in the description of it.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And sometimes it is treated with iron in the following manner: the patient lies on their back between your hands, and then dry the inflamed area of the rupture by applying a drying technique across its width according to the quantity of three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then stretch the white scrotum below the testicles until it is revealed.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the probe and place it over the protruding area of the scrotum, and press it against the front of the abdomen.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then sew the two protruding areas at the end of the probe of the scrotum together using a suture to join one to the other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then extract the end of the intestine, and do not incise the entire circumference, nor extend the wound, nor cause any other damage as I will teach you in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then treat it with the treatment of wounds, and when you incise the abscesses, cleanse that area and restore the wound before it solidifies; for the incision is contracted and the protrusion of the rupture is not properly adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cautery is better in this area, for it is closer to healing.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter LXVIII.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On the softening of the spermatic cord.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Often the spermatic cord is softened in some men because the flesh around it is softened, and this affects its condition.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore, it is necessary for the one who is engaged in its treatment to make the patient lie on their back, and incise the entire softened cord over the natural cord; then suture the two edges together.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you want, at the beginning, soften the excess of the loosened chain with three or four boilings and with a firm suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then cut between the sutures; and then treat for the healing of other wounds until it is healed and the pus has drained.
Capitol .lxix.	The line "Capitul .lxix." appears to be a chapter or section heading in the medieval text. It translates as follows:
De castracio.	From the context provided by the previous sentences and the nature of medieval medical treatises, "De castracio" likely refers to a section or discussion about castration. Here is a translation that fits within this context:
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that according to our law, castration is excommunicated, but for reasons known only to me, I feel compelled to mention it in this book; and there is no need to remember it except in two ways, of which the first is so that this knowledge be part of a doctor's understanding when they are questioned about it, knowing the cure for one to whom it has happened; and the second way is because we often have the necessity to castrate other animals for our own benefits through them, such as horses, bulls, pigs, and similar beasts.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And thus I say that castration is performed in two ways: either by traction or by making an incision and severing.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	But in the method that is performed by traction, the way of the operation is to have the animal immersed in hot water until its testicles are softened and loosened so that they hang.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	Then take them with your hand while they are still soft and do not let them appear or come into contact [with anything else].
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	But in castration performed by incision and severing, you must hold the animal and press the cord of its testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And then apply the suspensory device, and make an incision over each joint with a cut between two joints.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then incise that pus which you have squeezed out from each area.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not leave any other cause on the hump except for the subtle one that affects the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of castration is better, which is done by atrophy, because atrophy leaves no cause from the testicles for the animal to desire copulation.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And then care for the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter LXX.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in males occurs in two ways: one is when it appears in the space along the spermatic cord, between the two testicles, where a female genitalia-like structure appears with hair.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And sometimes from that area urine flows which is in the region of the testicles. 
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	Here is the translation of the provided medieval medical treatise sentence:
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the cure is of three types: two for men and one type for women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is necessary that you incise those tight tissues so that the swelling of that area is released, and then treat them with the cure for other afflictions.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second type for men, where you urinate from a condition affecting the area of the testicles, there is neither cure nor operation for it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	On swelling and protruding flesh caused by conditions in women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Swelling appears tightly due to natural causes, within which it is pressed and forms a lump; and sometimes it enlarges in some women to such an extent that it spreads similarly as in men and can even affect intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Then it is necessary that you grasp the excess swelling with your hand or with scissors and incise it.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not linger in the incision, especially near the region of the groin, so that it does not cause a flow of blood.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And then treat that with the healing of wounds until it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	Newly born flesh is flesh that grows in the openings of the mother until it fills them, and often it appears on the outer parts resembling a tail (and because of this, some early doctors called it “tailed disease”); therefore, we must incise it just as we would slowly cut into something, and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter LXXII.
De curacio de alratica.	Of the treatment of gout.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Gout is not when the woman's knee is pierced, or the track is small.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	And accidental is due to illness that has preceded it, and that which is caused either by improperly fitted flesh or by subtle or thick phlegm.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it is caused either in the area near the womb, or along its sides, or in its upper part, or in its lower part, and you should prohibit coitus, pregnancy, and childbirth, and strictly forbid menstruation. 
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the knowledge of that is obtained by examining the uterus, if the obstruction is apparent, it should be treated immediately; but if it is not apparent, then you search for it with your fingers or with a probe.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	And if the obstruction is by subtle phlegm and it adheres to both sides of the lips, then you should puncture and break that obstruction. 
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And you place pillows under both the labia, and then place your index fingers of both hands inside.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman should be on her back, her thighs spread apart, and then stretch the two lips with force so that that subtle barrier is broken and the obstruction is opened. 
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take wool and soak it in oil and place that on the area, and guard the day with a man so that the incised area is not disturbed.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	And if the abscess is large and thick, then you must incise it with a broad scalpel or with a myrtle leaf.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	And if the obstruction is due to a flesh growth, then suspend that part with an incision.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And with you should be the medicines that stop blood flow from bites, such as hellebore, and dragon's blood, and enses, mixed with egg white.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a wide lead cannula so that the wound is not sealed too lightly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And keep it for several days and administer calf's fat.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And then it should be treated with the other method of consolidation until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes it happens in the major growth of other tissues, and then you must incise according to this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	But if this is due to a chronic abscess, in the case of a chronic abscess that has grown significantly, do not treat it with iron in any way.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter LXXIII.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	On the treatment of hemorrhoids and tails and red boils that occur in the genital area of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are understood to be from the openings of small veins through which blood continuously flows; and when hemorrhoids become old, they harden. 
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already said in the division the types of those and the signs of those, and to say thus those that receive cure and those that do not receive cure.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore, I say that hemorrhoids and tumors when they are in the passage of the large intestine and do not appear to the senses, then surgery should not be performed on those.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	And those which are in the openings of the mother (womb) where one feels pain, are those that are treated.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And it is necessary that you place the woman in cold water and then stretch the tissue with scissors or with rough cloth, and incise them with the knives.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then sprinkle over those wounds the flow of blood with one of the astringent powders such as mastic and similar to these.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then foment the patient's feet for an hour, and then place them in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the flow of blood persists, then let her sit in a decoction of alum and pomegranate rinds and walnuts and similar items.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And then take flour of oats, mix it with honey and sweet wine, and make a plaster with that for the patient's back.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the blood is congealed, it is good; and if not, cause adhesion with two cupping glasses, and perform scarification on the nipples.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take wool and soak it in the juice of coriander or in the juice of angelica or in the juice of plantain with fermented wine, and apply it to the area; then treat the area with ointments until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	When using this remedy, which requires careful attention, you should inscribe what appears to you of the second thing I mentioned in the same manner. 
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And cure that which is inside so that it may be healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	It appears you've provided a section identifier, likely from an ancient or medieval text, specifically "Capitol .lxxiv." which translates to "Chapter 74" in numerical form. Without the accompanying content of this chapter for translation or explanation, I can only infer that this marks the beginning (or possibly the end) of Chapter 74 in whatever work you're referencing. If you have any specific text from this chapter that needs translating or explaining, feel free to provide it!
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	This phrase seems to be describing a medical procedure or condition in an archaic language that combines elements of Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. A translation into English could be:
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already described these diseases and their types and their symptoms, and their treatments in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And I must say in this treatise about an abscess that occurs in the breast when it is one of those abscesses that collect pus, and if you want to know how the operation with iron is performed.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Then you must consider whether the pain of the abscess at its beginning is sharp with percussion and phlegm and fever, and sometimes it reddens, and if you press on it, then do not treat it with puncture, and cure it with what aids maturation until the acuteness of the symptoms subsides.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And now you must have the woman sit on a stool that has two footrests; and lean her back on her elbows and position her feet towards the part below the belly, and spread her thighs apart, and place her arms below her breasts, and tie them with a binding as appropriate.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	Then the midwife should follow the correct method and administer the instrument with which the opening of the mother is cut, the form of which will be described in the following sections. 
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And when you want to administer this instrument, you place it at the entrance of the woman's vagina, and what of the instrument that enters into the vagina should not be more than the opening of the vagina itself and leave the patient.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	And if the instrument is larger than the opening of the mother (womb), then you must place cushions on the texture of the opening of the womb so that the entry of any instrument into the opening of the womb is prevented.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And it is necessary that you stop the liquid flowing in the tube above and that the minister holds the instrument and swirls the liquid until the opening of the main vessel is uncovered.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the pus appears and is touched with the hand and it feels hot and moist, then you must dry that area by removing its head with a spatula.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the pus is evacuated, then you must place on the wound a cloth dipped in oil rubbed or anointed with some astringent quality; and apply the bandage to the incision at the site of the main wound.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And place outside the wound and over the perineum clean wool soaked in water in which mallows have been boiled.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then it should be treated for about two days with an ointment which you need to apply until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And sometimes the wound and the affected area are washed with water and honey, then with water in which juice from lilies or longwort has been boiled, and then return to using the ointment.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is deep within a swollen area, then you must avoid treating it with iron, instead use what we have mentioned in the section for treatment.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter LXXV.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach the midwives how to treat unhealthy embryos when they appear according to an unnatural form.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	It is necessary that the midwife recognize the signs of a natural childbirth at the beginning. This occurs when you see the woman express desire for the parts [of the body] and wish to smell the air, and because of this, she is excited by what is about to happen in her childbirth, and hastens the expulsion of the embryo. At that time, you know that this birth is according to a natural form, with the expulsion of it over its head, and the second part hanging or suspended by the navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore, when you see those signs, then it is necessary that the patient's abdomen be compressed so that the embryo descends easily; for when they lie on their back, tell them to turn onto their side, and cleanse it of those excesses with a good purification.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	However, what is different in this part is not-natural and not-praiseworthy, for when the embryo is placed on its feet and the body of it is placed in front of its head and its feet, or one hand of it, or to its foot, or its head and its hand are placed, or to its abdomen, and quickly it is turned over onto its neck, resembling unpraiseworthy figures.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	When there is a necessary cause for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all those matters, and that she guards against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And I am showing all the figures of those [conditions], and what mechanism is in them so that it may be understood by this and stand upon this.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the flow is placed on her head by natural movement, and it is strong upon the woman and happens in a difficult part, and sometimes its strength is already weakened, then do this procedure, or let women have it, and evaporate its semen with fennel seed and moist oils.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then the midwife inserts her little finger between the ribs and splits it with that second finger, or she scrapes it with her nail to remove what is inside of moisture.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the woman's abdomen until the fetus descends.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	And if it does not descend, then the woman must be treated with a mixture of psyllium mucilage and fenugreek mucilage.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	Then command the one attending her to compress [her nose] and induce sneezing with condiments; and hold her mouth and nose for about an hour, for the fetus will be expelled soon. 
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if both thighs of the patient are dislocated at the beginning, then you must reduce them with ease little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	And if she does not obey the treatment, then place the woman on a chair and lift her feet up, and then tilt the chair towards the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall due to the tilting.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the thighs are not returned inside and the fetus dies, then incise those areas and extract the dead fetus or tie the body of the fetus to its hand with cloth and extract it carefully, because it will be dislocated.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	Regarding the expulsion of the embryo through the legs.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the fetus is positioned between the legs, then you must push those limbs upward, and then turn the fetus slightly, and then align it properly, and then take one of its feet and stretch them little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	But when it is already inside the thighs, then you command her to strain, and cause that expulsion with caution, because it will be dislocated if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not forgotten with what we have recommended, then you return the small part little by little until you place that second natural figure back, because it will now be easily remembered.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if all that we have recommended is prohibited, then take mastic of althea and dissolved gum, and pound it well in the mortar with good pounding, and then line the woman's womb with this, at the lowest part of her belly.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And then make that incision in tepid water, between the hypochondria.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when you see that the parts of his body have become inflamed, then perform the fumigation with myrtle and place him under it.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when you have the sub-fumigation for an hour, then make her sit on a chair, and then induce sneezing and open her mouth wide, and lift her up, and press the lower part of her abdomen with gentle compression, because the substance will be expelled soon.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the fetus will come out according to this method, then you gradually insert your fingers into its small hands; and then the woman should be laid on her side, and her feet pulled down, and she should be sitting on a cushion, and her hands are covered.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And then press on the patient's abdomen little by little, and then extract what remains of their feet from between where it was prepared in the part below their ears.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the wind has not passed, then take their feet and move them vigorously, and then press what is over the hypochondriac region little by little until the wind rises to the upper regions.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And then introduce your hands and gently massage the wound little by little, and instruct the woman to press herself as the wound is being treated. 
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Exuding from the side longitudinally hanging one of his hands.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Be ingenious in reducing the hand of him, but if you cannot reduce that, then elevate the limb and let it be moved.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if the person cannot walk, then make them lie down on the ground, and vigorously shake their thighs with a strong shaking motion, and then administer ointments that you have prepared from mucilaginous substances.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the childbirth has occurred, then make her sit on a chair, and then focus on reducing the swelling, aligning the limb according to its natural form, and make the woman sneeze and command her to compress herself internally until it is properly set in place. 
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Exuding from the fact over the neck spread out his arms and the surface of him is on the side of his mother.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	It is necessary that the midwife hold the hand of the newborn and then gently turn it little by little, so that it moves easily. 
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is mixed and once it has been warmed, then apply over the nose what we have recommended of oil and poultices.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And then you command him to moan little by little, and when you have done this, now place that cauterization on a plate and order her to lean over the right side, and then command her to be compressed; and make that person sneeze with condition.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The exit of the prepared fetus over the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When they say to deal with severe hemorrhoids according to this method, consider, and then you incise the second degree with your nail until the moisture is evacuated.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the fetus is suspended by the face and neck, then you incise that area of the nape, so that it is not trapped and can be delivered.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And then push the fetus into the parts inside where you need to place your hand, and instruct the woman to compress herself several times, and it will be expelled with a light emission, if God so wills.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The delivery of twins or multiple fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that twins are often born, and sometimes three or four are born, though this is rare and seldom occurs; however, their causes are from nature, not life. 
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And among those, even if they are multiplied, a second one, and they are separated by a cipher, distinguish them within the ligament in the navel of each of these. And sometimes they are expelled just as it is done by a light natural secretion, and sometimes they come out due to an unworthy expulsion, just as we have recounted.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if there are difficulties in childbirth and it leads to what we have said about unnatural positions, then you should treat those cases as we have recounted.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is skilled and does this with ease and subtlety, and with caution, and is inventive according to every shape according to what is prepared for the birth leading to health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remembrance of what is formed in the womb from embryos and are aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Here is the translation line by line:
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all of this must be known by the midwife who closely resembles what is described here, and thus applies herself to it with what is necessary.
Capitol .lxxvi.	The line you provided is likely a chapter or section heading in the medieval text. Here’s the translation:
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	Of the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you treat the dead fetus as we have said in the section on medication and it has not been expelled, and you must use manual operation, then you should consider whether the woman is of sound health and not subject to any accidents that might cause her harm.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then the woman should be placed face down on the bed on her stomach, with her head inclined to one side and her thighs elevated.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the minister should hold her in two places or bind her to the bed so that her body does not extend during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	Then you should moisten the birth canal of the mother with humid oils and with a poultice of coltsfoot and fenugreek and its seeds.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	Then anoint the practitioner's hand with those oils and poultices, and then insert the hand easily into the mother, and then search with the hand for the place where the fingers can grasp the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And here is the translation of the given sentence:
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	And if the pain is in the patient's feet, then it is in the instep, or in the middle of the back.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And it is necessary that the finger be held with the right hand, and place the curvature of it in the location between the fingers of the left hand, and insert the hand easily so that the finger reaches one of those places we have mentioned, until it reaches the swollen cause.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	Then place and keep another finger in the adjacent position, or a third if necessary, so that the attraction is equal, and it is not extended only according to its straightness.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And it should be moistened all over so that the discharge from it is alleviated, just as is done in the extraction of teeth.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And it is necessary in that area where the extension is to be softened; and if any part of it is retained, then the midwife should anoint some of her fingers with oil and insert those carefully and rotate with them whatever is retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore, if part of the fetus is stuck, then the fingers should be moved to a place that is better; do this until the entire fetus is delivered.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	And if one hand is extended in front of the other and it's not possible to reduce it due to the contraction of the limb, then a cloth must be wrapped around that; and then pull that out until all of it is protruding, and incise that either at the joint of the hand or at the elbow.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And thus you must do the same on the other hand and on both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	And if the head of the abscess is large, or you encounter constriction during exudation, or if water is tightly packed at the top, then you must insert between the fingers a pointed instrument and split the head to drain the water, or you should scrape it with an instrument called “alundat,” the form of which will come along with the forms of other instruments in the chapter that follows this one.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And similarly, if the abscess has a large head by nature, then you must incise it with a scalpel, or scrape it with an alundat as we have said; then remove the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head has exuded and is constricted by the forkbone, then it should be split so that the humidity within the feet can be drained.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	But if it is not complicated and does not require exudation, then you should incise the head as soon as it is possible for you to do so.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the lower part of the abdomen is abscessed or has dropsy, then you must pierce that area to drain the fluid inside it.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	And if the flux is towards the lower legs, then its attraction is slight and its direction towards the mouth of the vein is mild. 
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	And if the abdomen and the foot are swollen, then you must extract that which is inside by using cloth wrapped around your hand, and you must cut open the abdomen and the foot to let out what is inside them.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	Here is the translation line by line:
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the womb is narrowed by an abscess that has occurred in it, then you must not disturb it unnecessarily; first, you should administer an effusion of moist and fatty substances.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And administer plasters; and follow up with baths that soften and moisturize.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the procedure is on the patient's side, then it should be sutured: and administer what we have mentioned to the fresh wound.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if this is not possible, then it should be cut into pieces and extracted.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And it is necessary that you do not leave any cause within the second layer.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed the entire operation, then administer what we have said about the treatment on the swellings that occurred due to the major issue.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if bleeding occurs, then immerse in styptic waters and administer the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have seen a woman whose fetus was dead, and soon after she became pregnant again, and then the fetus died once more.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happened to someone that a swelling occurred in their abdomen; and it inflated inside, causing an opening, and they began to discharge pus.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called for his care, and treated him for a long time, but the plague did not heal.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I placed on him several strong adhesive plasters, and extracted a bone from him, and after passing some days, I extracted another bone; and I was very amazed because there were no bones in his abdomen.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then I thought that they were the bones of a dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then I treated the plague, and extracted many bones from him, the woman existing in his various dispositions, and he lived in this manner for a long time, cured of a small part of his arm. 
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I do not mean to be strange, but rather because in this lies knowledge and aid for what the doctor skillfully administers with his hand for treatment.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of a tool with which the womb is opened:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of a stretcher on which the ribs are aligned, with two tools attached at the two ends of the two poles.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	However, this tool must be more delicate than a stretcher and should be made of either iron or wood.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the width of each pole should be two digits, and the margin of each should be one digit on both sides; the length of each is one and a half palms. In the middle of the two poles, there are two joints made from the same type of wood which are already firmly attached; their length is about half a palm plus a little more, and the width of each is two digits or slightly more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additives should be inserted into the mouth of the mother so that it is opened with them when you turn the two prescribed instruments.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Let's translate this line:
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	And yet at the extremity of his two additions thus as sometimes happens, and the length of those additions is each one palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the womb with those methods, then you make the woman lie down on the ground with her feet hanging, and you open what is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then open your hand with the instrument just as you would with scissors, cutting according to the amount you want from the opening of the mother's mouth between which the midwife does what she wants.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of dizziness which the ancients said:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Form: By which method the fetus is expelled:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Forma de amisidat am le qual es conterit le cap gran.
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is similar to forceps which have teeth at the end, like pincers, and sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, like pincers, which have teeth like saw teeth with which it is cut and compressed.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	It appears that the phrase "Forma de amesidat pauc" is not in standard Latin or any of the Romance languages listed previously, but it seems to be using a mixture of words resembling these languages. Assuming this is a constructed sentence similar to the previous text, here's an attempt at translation:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Forma de unci havent una spina:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Forma de unci havent doas spinas:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Forma of forceps to which are attached closing teeth with which the head of the fetus is grasped:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Forma de dos espatums latz:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All those instruments are exercised, and when more of those types are multiplied and prepared by the artisans, it becomes lighter for their operation and better suited for people in terms of quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not use those instruments anywhere, for you should prepare yourself, because the necessity of those is not excusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	From the extraction of the stone.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second stage of labor is delayed, then you must command the patient to hold their breath, and then make them sneeze with pepper, and press your hand over their mouth and nose, and if by this means the expulsion occurs, it is good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then you take an ointment and perforate the covering with a hole and place there herbs burning at the mouth of the brazier, such as calamint, rue, dill, camomile, Arabian saffron, and cinnamon, and saint-john's-wort.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water in the pot, and place that over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	Then place a cane tube in the mouth of the container, and keep it there until the vapor reaches the cavity of the container.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	Then make her sneeze as we have said, and the second one will be expelled quickly. 
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	Here is the translation line by line:
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Before it is necessary that the sides right and left be changed with ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And then adjust the amount of suction, for it will obey and withdraw from adherence.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the opening of the womb is narrowed, we have already recommended treating it with sneezing and by applying a mixture of herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	But if it is not expelled by all the causes which we have recommended, then be careful not to overstrain in the process of extraction. However, it must be that what has been extracted from him reaches the opening of the womb and then anoint her with unguent and a four-part medicine; for this will cause it to rot within a few days and dissolve and be expelled.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	However, when you vomit, the bad humor rises to the head and to the stomach, which harms the patient; therefore, it is necessary to administer fumigations and appropriate treatments for this condition.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	However, some of the Ancients have already prescribed fumigation with juniper and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Here is the form of the instrument with which the woman is fumigated for the retention of menses and the second stage [of labor]:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It seems like this text is written in an old or constructed language that borrows from several Romance languages. Given the context of a medieval medical treatise and the structure of the sentences, here's my interpretation and translation for the provided sentence:
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And let the finer end be placed in the ash and the broader end over the fire, and the fumigation should be placed over the embers of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And let it be such that the fumigation is consumed, and repeat with another one.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	On the treatment of an unperforated infant's anus.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Some children are born with their anus unperforated, which is a fine and obstructed condition.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then it is necessary for the midwife to pierce that obstruction with her finger; and if not, pierce it with a sharp spatula, and be careful not to touch the bladder.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	Then place wool soaked in wine and oil over that area; then treat it with ointment until it heals.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	But if you fear that it is obstructed, then insert a catheter into the passage for several days, and remove it when the child needs to defecate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And sometimes the anus is obstructed due to consolidation from plague or an abscess; in that case, it is necessary to incise that consolidation and then treat it with the methods we have mentioned for treatment and using a poultice.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	For the treatment of fistulas that occur below,
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that appear in the lower part, near where pus is released, are large and thick; those that appear close to the buttocks from outside or in the space of one side.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is a fistula or abscess.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that swelling is old and runs with white phlegm or subtle pus, and sometimes these fistulas are penetrating.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those that penetrate are known by what is discharged from them through secretion and wind; and sometimes the patient suffers from this discharge, and it is forcefully expelled as worms.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And sometimes these fistulas penetrate into the space between the bladder and the penis; and they also penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the area around the knee.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And the way to distinguish a penetrating fistula from a non-penetrating one in the rectum is that you insert your index finger into the rectum, and carefully introduce a thin probe of wax or metal into the fistula when there is no tortuosity.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if there is tortuosity in that area, then introduce a thin probe of lead or horsehair until you feel the probe or the hair with your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel any of the above or do not find any signs of trauma or cause for discharge, such as worms or gas, as we have said, then know that it is non-penetrating, and now pay attention to the treatment.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the urethra of the penis, then its significance is that urine leaks from there and it prohibits proper healing, so the area must be treated with medicine to consolidate it.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	But if it penetrates into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the area, then its sign is that it extends deeply within without any curvature in the bone, causing pain around the affected area; and that there is continuous pus discharge; and that it does not respond to treatment, nor can it be consolidated with ointment.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those penetrating fistulas, a complete cure is not always possible, and the treatment for them depends on the skill and experience of the surgeons who are treating them.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	But in those that are not penetrating and are recent, healing with iron is hoped for, as I will recommend to you, and this I have already proven.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the patient lies between your hands upon their back and raises their thighs towards you, with the knees bent towards their belly, and then insert a lead probe, or an iron one if it is in the tortuous fistula, until you feel where the probe reaches.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if the patient feels pain around the neck, then you must insert your index finger into the neck.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel in your hand the tendency already by itself to penetrate uncovered, or what you feel between your hand and that sipha or flesh, then you know certainly that that is penetrating; and then do not work on that, for it is not in that healing, just as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But however some say it is healthy in some men late.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And of the treatment by which improvement is hoped for in him, you use a fine cautery according to the width of the fistula, as has been previously mentioned, and insert that heated cautery into the fistula until it reaches around the neck; then repeat this two or three times until you know that all those fistulized tissues resembling feather quills have adhered.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	Then treat it with cloths wrapped in ointment until all the adhered tissues come out, and then treat it with medicines that generate and consolidate the flesh. If it is healed, that is good; if not, it will never be cured by any other treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the probe is inserted and does not penetrate your finger which is in the rectum, and between that finger and the probe, there appears to be a layer of flesh or membrane, and you turn the fistula so that it lies on the surface of the chain. Then dry the chain from the beginning of the fistula, and you will dry it with the probe, placing it inside the fistula until the drying reaches the point where the tip of the probe ends, and through the probe, it is freed and cut.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then clean those fistulous flesh which resemble bird feather quills and do not break any of them for any reason.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	And if a flow of blood should come between you and your operation while you are cutting those tissues, then the best method is to cauterize with fire or with sharp instruments, because cauterization with fire has two good effects: it helps in the joining together of those tissues that have been cut, and it stops the bleeding by drying out the moistures.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	Then treat that area with cloths wrapped in bandages or finely ground herbs placed on the wound, and then treat the wound with ointments that generate and strengthen flesh.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And thus medicines that have astringent and drying properties; when the wound is restored, it is healed and you do not fear recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	But if the fistula has already penetrated into the rectum and extends from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the rectum and investigate with it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And so if you feel resistance and between you and it there is a layer of tissue or flesh, and penetration is difficult, then the operation on it should not be performed except as a last resort out of necessity and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The sentence you've provided appears to be a mix of medieval Latin and Romance languages, likely written during the time when medical knowledge was transitioning from purely classical sources to more contemporary practices. Here's an attempt at translating it line by line into English:
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the fistula is treated in this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it is on the side of the buttock around the surface of the body with the chain and at the edge of the buttock, then take a probe with a perforated end, which is like a needle for preparing the cores in this way:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	And insert into that channel wrapped with five threads or around those; then try to insert thread into the fistula until it reaches its cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	And if you are penetrating into the margin of the anus from inside, then you extract the thread from that place in such a way that you insert your finger into the anus; and you pull out the end of the thread and tie both ends together tightly, and leave it like this for one or two days, and when you cut the thread into the flesh, tighten well the part between which the flesh is to be cut that lies between the two ends of the thread.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	Then treat the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the openings of the fistula are not penetrable, then make them penetrable in whatever way you prepare, but ensure there is movement within the pus, for it is not for you to do this so as not to cut the tendon; then treat it until it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The form of the spiked spatula with which the fistula is split: the curvature of which is sharply pointed and the other part is not sharp, so as not to cut what is not necessary, just as is often done.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	On sewing hemorrhoids from which blood flows during the incision.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And of those [sores] that are small and large, and from which blood flows continuously, and they are one, and [they have] specks, and they are outside the anus, and in the extremities.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	But however those that affect the anus are according to months of little humidity, from which yellow water or a little blood with continuous pus flows, and according to the color of the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the treatment for what is inside the anus is that you command the patient to sit and to strain such that the anus stretches and the hemorrhoids appear before you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you take care and suspend them with hooks or hold them with your nails, and then cut those veins at their roots.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	If the nails are not held in place by moisture and softening of them, then take those with rough cloth or with a cudgel or with a beating of wool, and extract them with your fingers, and then cut into them and sprinkle some healing powders on them near the incision, so that they may serve as a substitute for cauterization; or cauterize them according to what is prescribed in the chapter on cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then treat them with other treatments until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the bowel does not obey evacuation, then use a clyster on the patient with one that has a small opening, and wash it with the water in the bottle that allows for gentle evacuation when the patient is squeezed.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then the cause is slight, and you should take them with your fingernail, or take them with forceps, cut into them, and then treat them with what we have said until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And for the one who requires incision, you must administer sutures according to this method: take wrapped thread and insert it into a needle, then pull out the hemorrhoids to the upper parts, and make that penetrate with the needle at the edge of the other side. Wrap both ends of the thread around the part farthest from the needle in a transverse manner; tighten the hemorrhoid with strong traction, and then tie off the thread and remove the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this for all [areas], and leave one untouched without stitching it, so that the excess blood can flow out from there.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And then place over the buttocks a cloth dipped in oil rubbed or in wax; and put that over the wound and command the patient to rest on it.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then insert that into the cavity; and when it is heated, treat those areas with ointments or other treatments until they are healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	On the treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	White spots occur due to drying of the skin or natural constriction.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And when they are old and no longer respond to that medicine, then you must scrape those areas with the tip of a spatula or your nail until they become moist and rid themselves of the pus on top, which prevents them from healing; then treat those areas until they heal.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then you remove those areas with vigorous scraping more than the first time until they bleed and are raw; then treat those areas until they heal.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	On the treatment of hemorrhoids, this is crucial.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Here is the translation of the provided medieval medical text:
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then it is necessary to cut what is in the area of the nail, hold it with scissors or tweezers, and remove it from its root; then care for that area.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize the wound that is mentioned in the preceding chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	And a wart is a small, rough, tubular, round protrusion on the surface of the body, and they often appear on the hands of children. 
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And the treatment of it is that you stretch and incise that area, or you twist that area with a thread or with hair inside which catches.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you want, cauterize that, as we have said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And already the sprains and dislocations have been treated with the instrument that I will describe.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	And a formica is a small hairy or pimply protrusion on the surface of the body that moves slightly, and when cold reaches it, it feels like the bite of an ant, and it appears around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And the treatment for it is that you take a tube made from an owl feather or a vulture feather, and let it be strong, and place that over the formica so that it is contained within the circle of the tube; then rotate your hand with the tube until you cut what is inside the circle of the formica, and press that into the flesh area, and thus eradicate the formica from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, do this with a tube of brass or iron according to this method:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Let the part above the tube be tapered, closed (that is, unperforated), and covered so that when placed on a finger, it fits smoothly and allows for its rotation.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you want to cauterize the swelling as has been mentioned in the cauterization of atrophy in the chapter on cautery.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	Of the shape of the instruments that are used to give christeries (a term which seems contextually related to bloodletting or medical procedures).
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Here is the translation of the given sentence line by line:
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of large and small abscesses:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the tube above, which is tied to the bag, should be wide according to this manner; and it should be at a distance where the bag is tied in such a way.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the extremity of the pus below, which is inserted into the anus, is closed (so it is not open) by a lion, due to subtlety; and on one side there are two tracks, and on the other side one track, and the width of the track should be according to the thickness of the rays, with the larger ones being a little thicker.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And let the bag in which the medicines are placed be made of animal bladder or sheepskin, and its size be one palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be pierced by thick threads in such a way that it is sewn up; and the space between the threads is as thick as a finger.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then insert into those tracks strong honey of raw honey which is from ten hives, or around those; and adjust with that the bag; and when the bag is placed on him, it should be tight at the head of the catheter between two distinguishable points with strong compression; and then catheterize each track: However, the quality of catheterizing with that is that you fill the bag with the medicine which is warmed according to the quantity of the patient's tolerance; and beware lest it be too hot or too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And then the patient should be laid on their back, and raise their legs up and place them on a pillow or a bolster; and then anoint the tip of the cautery with oil or egg white or fenugreek mucilage or similar substances; and then insert that into the anus easily; and then the minister should take the bag and squeeze it with both hands and repeatedly with force until everything in the catheter is evacuated into the intestine; and then remove the catheter, and the patient raises their legs to the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces it to excretion, let it be as much as possible; and if one sleeps with that for an entire night, it is more beneficial for healing.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	If you diagnose someone with intestinal disorders and the vomiting troubles them, then repeatedly apply the cautery until they are healed. 
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if there are hemorrhoids or abscesses in the anus, then use a gentle and strong enema, specifically an enema with which children are cleansed.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Of the treatment of the plagues.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, it is said that the plagues are diverse according to how the plagues are caused and according to the place upon which the plagues fall. 
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes by which many times plagues are caused are such as the throwing of stones, or cutting with a sword or knife, or striking with a spear, or with clubs, or with arrows, or similar to those many causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I am recommending the treatment of some diseases for which you should pause this reasoning and apply these rules to other ailments.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I begin with the simple headaches, for the memory of the compound ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore, when you encounter a simple headache in the head and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it is due to a blow or something similar, and if the chain has already been strained so much that there is a severe pain and you fear the formation of an abscess, then you should be cautious and perform venesection on the cephalic vein immediately; do not delay this. Extract blood from him according to the amount appropriate for his strength, unless there are prohibitive reasons for venesection, especially if the blood that comes out due to the pain is small.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And the venesection should be performed on the opposite side of the affected area; and protect the patient from relapse and from wine and heavy foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if there is any contraindication due to some detail, then reduce the food intake and avoid meat and wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And place over the affected area, if an abscess has formed, some wool in olive oil or in wine which has been stypticated (treated with a styptic).
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	And if you are sure of a hot abscess, then place [the treatment] on the wound, if it is new with its own blood and the air has not changed that powder which I will mention shortly.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed that condition, then place poultices on it until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	And if the wound is large or caused by a sharp and similar instrument, and the edges of it cannot be brought together with pillows, then bring those edges together with sutures as I will describe regarding the suturing of them.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	But if the wound has already exposed the bone and sinew, and there is no retention of it but only a small suspensor, then incise that area and subsequently treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh near the wound site. Command the patient to be fed foods that are nourishing: broths and forms that are similar to them until it is healed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find putrefaction in the wound that does not adhere to the bone, then you should incise all of that rotten part and remove it, and subsequently treat it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	But if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which bleeding can occur and it cannot be stopped by medicines, then you should probe the artery. If you find that it has not been cut, then incise it with a scalpel or tie it off; and if the necessity arises such that what we have said does not work, then cauterize until the bleeding is stopped.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these sores are simple and small, then their cause is slight; therefore, you sprinkle this powder over them, which solidifies before the air changes them.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the method of the powder is this: take oil of sesame one part, dragon's blood two parts, unextincted charcoal three parts; let it all be finely ground and sieved, and with it fill the wound, and apply a good constriction over that area, and let it coagulate with the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And then bind that over with pillows and leave it so, and do not untie it while it is thus, until it is healed, for the medicine within has not taken effect until it is cured.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes this alone is done as a cautery, when you do not have at hand the ashes and dragon's blood.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this same procedure is performed on large wounds when it is necessary to place it over them and keep them tight, especially fresh wounds with their blood, which have not been altered by the air.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is in the summer season, then this powder application is not intended. Instead, treat them with what we have mentioned, such as placing certain ointments on them, or placing flour mixed with water and honey over them until they begin to putrefy; and then treat them with other treatments until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	But if the wound is accompanied by a fracture in the bone, and it is small, then you remove it with gestures [likely meaning gentle manipulations or treatments].
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I will speak of the cure for fractures of the head in what is venomous.
De las plaguas del col.	From the ailments of the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	But if the ailment affects the neck, then there is no difference in treatment, and it is similar to a simple ailment of the head.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	But if the nerves or arteries of the neck are cut, then if it is a nerve, no remedy should be applied that causes strong astringency, such as zinc and vitriol, which adhere to the nerves and contract them.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not apply any source of cold to the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold and their continuation is connected to the brain, which is the most sensitive part of all the members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it is to be treated with mild medicines, such as washing with warm water, sometimes infused in olive oil, whether cooked or uncooked, and thyme when washed with warm water, along with other small stones according to this method, and moist ointments.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the wound is large, then administer stitches, or bring the edges together, and then treat it with powders until it heals.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	And if there is depth to the wound or you encounter putrefaction in the lowest part of it, then pierce it at the deepest point of corruption.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	But if in the wound an artery is already cut and bleeding has occurred, then separate or dry it out, tie it up, or cauterize it if the situation requires it.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the vertebrae of the neck have already been cut through entirely and the veins of the neck are saved, then you should sew the edges of the wound over the bone of the neck without touching it; first align it and reduce it to its natural shape, then strengthen it with proper binding, and leave it for several days; afterward treat it with ointments that have astringent and stimulating properties until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	But if the wound has caused a protrusion in the bone, then percuss it, and if there are fragments of bone, extract all that you can; leave what cannot be reached until the wound putrefies, and let it separate so that the protrusion is reduced.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the wound is recent, then sprinkle over it the powder that has been recommended.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	And if an ulcer forms in the wound, then treat it with that which the remedy will be discussed later in the appropriate chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Regarding wounds to the neck or similar, when made between the shoulders, whether caused by a spear, sword, lance, or similar weapons.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a puncture from a lance or sword, and you measure the depth of the wound, then consider whether gas escapes when the patient breathes; if so, know that the wound is mortal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is no deep penetration and the wound is recent with its own blood, then you should apply powder to it within the first hour, without stopping it so that the blood does not remain in the depth of the wound and return to the heart, thereby harming the patient; instead, apply an attractive unguent, and cleanse it twice a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the unguent is not available, then you should apply a dry cloth to the wound's opening to absorb the moisture that is present; and have the patient lie on the wound so that what is inside can drain out.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	More if three days or more have passed since the plague has taken hold and no spasms, palpitations of the heart, or constriction of the breath occur in the patient, and you observe other good signs in them, then know that the plague is manageable; and then treat it with plasters and other treatments until it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	But if the healing of the wound is delayed, and it has been open for a long time, then know that it has become a fistula; therefore, treat it according to its chapter [i.e., follow the specific instructions for treating a fistula].
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the wound is caused by a cut from a sword or knife, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or back, then treat it with sutures if it is large, or with powder if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	But if the bone has already become infected, and there are still pieces of the cut within it, then you should probe the wound and attempt to extract those pieces if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	But if they are not separated, then leave them inside until the wound becomes putrid, which will make their extraction easier.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other accidental plagues in other parts of the body, the remedy in cure is the remedy that we have mentioned.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the ailments of the abdomen.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The discomfort that occurs in the abdomen is either severe, mild, or moderate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	In severe cases, you will see the intestine or nerve of the intestine, because there is a more forceful and finer intrusion and suturing of them.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And a small disruption is made difficult by another method, and it is known that their reduction is more difficult if you do not attend to the intrusion of them into their place immediately, because they swell and become thickened, making the insertion difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	Therefore, the best disruption is moderate, for in that case, the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, just as it is difficult in the two previously mentioned types.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And know that the suturing of the abdomen is done in four ways, but two of these sutures are common and similar to the suturing of other ailments of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other specific sutures are similar to those used in other ailments, but they are more specifically applied in the suturing of the abdomen.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I recommend to you each with explanation and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Thus, it is said that when the hernia is small and some part of the intestine has protruded because of this, and it is difficult to reduce it back, then this can happen in one of two ways: either due to the small size of the rupture as we have said, or when the intestine has become inflamed due to the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And thus when this is the case, then you must warm it in such a way that you soak a sponge or cloth in warm water alone, or boil water with squill, cyperus, and fennel, and apply that to the intestine until the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And sometimes it is done in the way that has astringency, and it is better than plain water for resolving the inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And thus when you see the inflammation resolved, then moisten the intestine with water in which mullein and mallows have been boiled, for this alleviates the interior of it without much effort.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	And if it is necessary to use the instrument for this treatment, then cut the disruption slightly with an instrument with which you can incise hemorrhoids.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first treatment is better when it is appropriate that there be no drying, and there should not be an effort to dry near necessity and deficiency.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	From the instrument, if it is of this form:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of the sharp wound, and the other part not-sharp, and the extremity subtle, and it should not be as subtle as a spatula, rather it should be slightly blunt.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And so when the inflammation has intensified and you have removed the intestine, it is then necessary that its reduction be according to its natural form, in its proper place, if possible, because that is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	And when the disruption is large and located in the lower part of the abdomen, then it is necessary that you make the patient lie on their back, and raise their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then you should raise their head and feet higher than the rest of the body.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then always direct your attention and consideration so that the part where the inflammation is located is higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus you should administer this in severe inflammations and in moderate inflammations as well.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in small inflammations, apply what you have prepared, then have the assistant place their most compassionate hands over it, holding the disruption entirely with their hand and bringing the edges together, and then suture it from one end to the other as needed.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the method of common suturing: first you take the needle, or a pack of needles according to the amount of width of the wound; and then leave at the extremity of the disruption of the ring finger, and hold the needle tightly so that you do not insert thread into both ends of the chain; with both ends of the stitch that is left on the chain from inside, until that penetrates from that part; and you have already added both ends of the chain and both ends of the stitch, and thus four orders are made. 
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And then strengthen with double thread around the circumference of the needle, and sometimes on both sides together, and then join the two lips and the wound by a proper joining; and then leave the thickness of the finger and put another needle in that place, and then tie that one with thread as you did with the first needle; and do not stop doing this if necessary until you have completed the entire constriction of the wound.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And let the needles be of moderate thickness between thick and fine, for fine needles lightly penetrate the flesh; and thick ones are difficult to insert into the wound, and therefore it is necessary that they be of moderate fineness and thickness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And it is not necessary that the needle be inserted at both ends of the wound too deeply, so that the flesh is not cut lightly and the wound may heal before its consolidation. 
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And do not make the stitches too long so that the wound is not prevented from healing.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	Then cut the ends of the needles so that they do not disturb the patient during their sleep; and place over the sutures small pieces of cloth from all sides, which hold the ends of the needles; leave those in until you know that the wound is fully healed.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And this method of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, where sewing them up with one or two needles or around that number is sufficient.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	But the second type of suture is communal: you administer the suturing of the four extremities, of the tendon and two ends of the spine, at once, with a needle on which the thread is wrapped equally in fineness and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	Then, when you have penetrated these four extremities with the needle, withdraw the needle from that same side where you started, so that the thread pulls tightly from the deepest part of the wound to the surface, so that the suture is like a cloth suture with which the cloths are strongly held together.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And place between each suture the thickness of the smallest finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this suture knows the men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And with such a suture, I sewed the wound which was inflicted on a man in his abdomen, which had been struck by a knife; and it was a rupture of the wound larger than a palm, and the intestines were displaced around two palms from their proper place, and there was disruption in the middle of the member; and then I returned the intestine after it had protruded for 24 hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound was healed within about fifteen days, and I treated it until it was cured; and afterwards he lived for many years, and his condition improved.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And the other doctors had judged that he could not be cured; and yet, by a miracle, he was healed, for I did not treat him with ointment, for there was no place to find any ointment or medicine. Instead, I placed on the wound an old cloth twice a day and washed it frequently with honey water until he was healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	But I will describe two types of suture specific to the narration of the Word.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And you begin with a chain suture, inserting the needle from the outer part to the inner part.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And so when the needle penetrates into the spine and in that manner passes straight through and along the entire length of the body, and leaves the tip of the syringe in which you have inserted the needle; and make it penetrate from inside to outside at the other end of the body.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And when you have made that penetration, then penetrate again in the same extremity of the cloth from the outer part to the inner part; and leave the extremity of the needle that is on this side, and pierce the needle through the other end from the inner part to the outer part.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make the penetration with that needle with which you pierce through to the inner end of the wound so that all of it penetrates inside.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then begin from this side and pull that needle with the end that is on the other side, and remove the needle from the suture you have penetrated, and then return it to that suture and sew the end of the needle that is on the other side with this end of the wound; and remove it from the suture that belongs to it.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this once and again, doing it one after another until you sew everything that is on the outside according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the essence of this method of suturing is that you sew with a skin suture with which I sew the skins, ensuring that you sew the needle once from one end of the thread, and leave the other end until it is completed. 
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	More importantly, the second type of suture, which you might also call Gualia, and this is about sewing through something and bringing it back together, is when you stitch that area in such a way as other doctors stitch it, ensuring every part is joined to its corresponding natural counterpart; and they align one end with another end, and the opposite side with the other end, all done according to what I have recommended to you.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	You must place the needle at one end of the wound on the outer part, and make it penetrate into the inner part in that area, leaving two ends of the thread; then rotate the needle and make it pierce from the outside to the inside through both ends of the thread.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	Then rotate those needles, and make each one penetrate from the inner part to the outer part through both ends of the wound on the opposite side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this method of suturing is better than the common superficial suturing, and it is a suturing technique that leads to better healing.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the line translated into English:
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And more so, they say that the abdominal suture is corrected with two needles, such that you insert a thread into each of them, and begin by passing your needle through what must be done by you, and make it penetrate to the other side according to the suturing method used for stitching hearts equally.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And know that when the disruption is in the middle of the abdomen, then缝合它比腹部其他部位的缝合更困难。
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	But the treatment of plague is judgment of other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the wound, then apply ointments to that area while they prevent it from becoming hard and crusty, and let the pus discharge; and then treat it in the same way as other wounds until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	And if the medicines are not available to you, then apply something to that area immediately, as it begins to emit pus and becomes old. Change this twice a day, as you have been taught, until it is healed, for you should not require other medication in many conditions when the wounds are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	But if you fear that the wound may spread to the major limbs, then you must soak lion's wool in high-quality tempered oil or in anointed oil, and apply that around the area between the joints and leave the bandages on.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if there is pain or putrefaction in the intestines, for this often occurs multiple times, then treat it with black styptic vinegar, especially if the corruption has spread into the intestine and has penetrated into its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that the one that is of the large intestine has a lighter healing than the one that is in the small intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is difficult to heal when the intestine which is called “gegunu” does not receive healing from plague that falls upon it entirely; and this is due to the great number of veins within it and because of its large size, and by the subtlety of its substance, and because of its closeness in nature to nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	And if what you process from the plague is the cloth, and you obtain that recently, reduce it according to your prescription with which you treat intestines equally.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	But if it has passed into the space and is already green or black, then when you stretch that with a needle over the area that is discolored, to cause blood flow, because in the cloth there are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then incise what is another ligament, and place the two ends of the needle hanging from the part where the plague has exited, so that you may alleviate the tension by lifting the cloth and allowing the discharge of the arm from the plague.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Recall of the plagues when they occur in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When there is a rupture in the intestine and it is small, then it can be repaired in some people. For this reason, I saw one who was afflicted in his abdomen with a spear wound and the wound was on the right side of the stomach; the wound was old and had become fistula, and such was its discharge and flatulence.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then I considered the treatment of him already since he was not confident in his recovery, but stopped subtlety intervening where fire heals and the area is consolidated. 
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And I advise that you see the area already stabilized, so as not to scare the patient into falling into an unfortunate event in their belly; and do not let any such misfortune happen due to this accident, and continue with their usual dispositions of eating and drinking, and then bathe in a bath and exercise in their words.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And already some experienced ones have said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be tied according to this manner: you take maggots with large heads; then adjust the two lips of the wound and place one of those maggots, which has its mouth open, on the two edges of the wound; thus, when it clamps onto them and tightens its mouth, cut off its head because it adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	Then place another maggot next to the first one, and do not stop doing this with maggots placed next to each other according to the extent of the entire wound.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	Then bring it back and close the wound; let those heads remain attached inside the intestine until the intestine is healed; do not cause any harm to the patient.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestine be tied with fine threads made from the membrane of an animal attached to it, as they are finer than needles; you take the end of these intestinal threads, which should be stripped of flesh, and then tie the end of it with a thread wrapped around it, and then insert that thread into needles and sew the intestine with them, and bring it back into the disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this method of stitching with ants is nothing more than a second way of trust and hope. 
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	And if the wound is large and extensive, especially if it is in one of the delicate intestines, because then it cannot be healed by simple suturing, and it does not result in a complete cure.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	On the treatment of gout and fistula.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that any wound or abscess, when it becomes corrupted and old, and turns into an ulcer, and does not heal but continuously discharges pus without ceasing, is universally called a fistula, and we call it by that name, azukem.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And a fistula, in truth, is a hairy, hard, white nodule with which there is no pain, and it has a cavity like the hollow of a bird's feather; and for this reason we call that ulcer rizatz, that is, hollow.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And in some people, there is moisture that discharges pus; and quickly, this moisture is stopped within a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And at times this moisture is thick, small in quantity, coarse, and fine.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already said in the division when I speak of wounds that every ulcer which is not healed nor is it on raw flesh, is so only due to one of these causes: one of them being either from lack of blood in the body; or by its own malice; or because between it and the lips there is hard flesh prohibiting new skin growth; or because it is a light dust; or because that ulcer within itself rots and the material that comes out of it is of bad quality; or because the medicine used is unsuitable for its treatment; or when corruption sets in the region, and it becomes pestilential; or due to the property of the region as in Saragossa where difficult digestion of illnesses occurs, and the natural healing of abscesses is delayed there; or because within it there is one bone or pieces of bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	And I have shown all those causes, their signs, and the cure of them with medicines in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And it is also necessary for me to make you know the treatment of fistula, which is performed through surgical operation by hand.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And know that fistula can occur in all parts of the body; for among those are fistulas that extend to large veins and arteries, or to nerves, or to the spine, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to some of the vertebrae of the back, or to any of the composite joints such as those of the hand and foot; and among those are those that affect the proximity of the main limb and similar areas.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And therefore, one of these fistulas that follows this method is among the illnesses difficult to heal, and does not receive cure, and the occupation with it involves labor and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if it is one of the fistulas whose depth does not reach these places that I have mentioned, and you hope for and trust in its healing, and wish to gain knowledge of it, then take a probe of horn or iron, and if the fistula runs straight, explore it with this.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	If the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a thin lead probe, for lead, because of the lightness of its body, is flexible and can follow the twists.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula contains horrible growths, it is not possible for you to probe it with a probe.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then cleanse the openings through their own openings, for the liquid with which you flush it will follow the other openings and flow out from them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	Then carefully examine in whatever manner you can to determine if there are bones or nerves here, whether the fistula's cavity is deep or shallow, or if it is a fistula with multiple openings and address this entirely with all your strength through your examination, by which you investigate the patient, and trace the source of the pain by pressing on the area with your hand, and similar signs and accidental causes of the abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And after you have stood over all those causes with true understanding, then proceed to the treatment with confidence: consider now whether it is an apparent fistula that is close or in a hidden place, deep within a joint, nerve, artery, vein, or one of the places which I have mentioned to you.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	If the fistula is of great depth and goes straight through, then you must incise that as much as possible according to your ability, and then clean all its corrupted flesh; and then administer cloths wrapped in sharp medicines, and introduce those into the cavity of the fistula which you have probed with an iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do this several times until the sharp medicine corrodes everything that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula from the corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore it with ointments that will generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	But if it is not healed by this method, then you must cauterize it as we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	But if the cause of the fistula is bone and you must be certain of this, then you should investigate it and dry it out as we have recommended, provided that you do not interfere with any vein or nerve or main member, as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is exposed and there is some corruption and blackness in it, then you must scrape that area until all the corruption is removed; and then treat it with something that will cause flesh to grow until it is healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if the arm is not healthy and healed as it should be, then you know that you have not fully reached the eradication of the corruption; and then you further examine it carefully and thoroughly understand its condition and cleanse it with your final strong treatment, and then restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And if it is healed, that is good; and if not, then you know that the corruption lies in the deep parts of the body, which has not been reached, and then there is nothing for you to do but to leave that area alone.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is possible for you to remove it, then you should remove it with delicate forceps that are suitable for this purpose.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there are multiple bones [affected], then carefully extract all of them, and do not leave any behind for any reason with your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if any cause of moisture hinders you, and there is neither fear nor error in its incision, then cut those ligaments or flesh if they are present, and free the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	Here is the translation of the given line:
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence line by line into English:
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	And if it is a large bone such as the hip or thigh bone or similar to those, and what is corrupted of it is only its surface, then scrape away that area solely from behind within so that that blackness and corruption may be removed, and then restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	And if what is corrupted of him is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the bone marrow, then it is necessary to close that area by completely cutting inside the place where the corruption has spread, and now treat that inner part so that it may consolidate.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend to you that which may happen to a man in his thigh so that you use this as an example and aid for your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A young man by age around thirty years old, to whom joint pain occurred in his thigh, and from the inner parts becoming inflamed, the matter inside the body has spread to the thigh, and it is pus-like material with a large abscess, and there was no external cause for him.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then the time is prolonged by that error of the doctors until the abscess is opened, and pus comes out from it, and its healing is slowly resumed until the chest becomes fistulized, and many holes are made in it through which all the putrefaction and the moisture of the body pour out.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then many doctors treated the illness for about two years, and none of them knew much about the art until I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And you see his chest and the substances that were flowing from those orifices through large passages; and already the body of that man was entirely corrupted, and its color was yellowish.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I inserted the probe into one of those orifices and the probe reached the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	Then I examined the holes closely and found those reaching all parts of the chest.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I prepared and made an incision on one of those orifices where I discovered a part of the bone, and found it to be corrupted; it was already brittle, corrupted, and blackened; and a part of the chest that had been penetrated was already corrupted, extending into the marrow.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I treated what was discovered and prepared of the exposed bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I ensured that only the corruption in the bone was cut away and treated, which I had already identified.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	Then I applied the restoration of the wound with consolidating medicine for a long time, and it was not consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	Then I repeated the procedure and exposed the bone again over the initial exposure, and found continued corruption with the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And let it be clear what appears to me from that corruption, and then I was pierced in order to perform the cure and restoration, and it is not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I discovered on the other side and did not cease to cut the small bone bit by bit particularly and perform its restoration, and it was not restored until I cut around about a palm of it, and that which was extracted with its marrow, and then I restored it with medicines, and it was slightly consolidated and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And iteration in the operation and section of it is not necessary unless due to the disposition of its fragility and the lack of tolerance and fear of death, for it is affected at all times by the excess of evacuation and fainting.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And thus it is entirely healed, and nothing but hard flesh is in place of the bone; and its disposition is well arranged in its body, and its strength returns; and it is converted in its dispositions, and no contradiction occurs during movement nor any harm in any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	But if there is a prominent bone in an already injured part of the body, then you must cut it according to this method: take some thread and tie it tightly at the end of that protruding bone, and command someone to pull on it; use a thicker woolen bandage than the first one; then bind it over the flesh next to the bone, and stretch the extremity so that you pull the flesh apart from it. You must uncover the skin in the area where you wish to cut so that the saw does not touch the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And place a board or plank under the bone properly, for when you do this, it is not prohibited to saw where the corrupted flesh does not adhere.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And it is necessary that the incision be made gradually over the corrupted area, because if the corruption is in the cavity of the bone and does not appear on its surface to the touch, it may require further incisions to address it.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupted but not prominent, and one part is connected to the other, and the corruption is in the middle or part of it, then you uncover all the flesh completely; then place a stick under it, and then cut through the first part where the corruption is until the incision continues into the other part.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And make the incision according to the location of the corruption, a little bit, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and cut the bone where it continues from the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation between two joints, then it is not reasonable to proceed but rather to stop.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; however, you must investigate how the corruption appears to you, and you should open that area, and cleanse it according to whatever method is possible for you, and with every effort be corrected by you, unless there are veins or nerves that would make it contrary.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And you should know what the incisors and saws are used to cut these bones, which vary according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of them, and their thickness, and their fineness and greatness and smallness, and their hardness and rarity; for which reason it is necessary that you prepare every kind of instrument suitable for each operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And you should know that this operation implies for you the type of instrument you will need; when you have great study and long experience and knowledge of the methods of this art, and testimony of the ways of diseases, because now you have them by yourself to apply what is appropriate from the instruments to every disease.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And I am here to you, forming at the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will use simply with which you will proceed in your practice, which you will experience on others.
Forma de serra:	Form of the saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw: 
Forma de autra serra gran:	Forma de autra serra gran:
Forma de ray:	Forma de ray:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	The text appears to be written in a language that blends elements from Latin and Romance languages. Let's translate the given sentence into English:
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it is not appropriate that with this, the ends of the joints be rubbed when they are corrupted, or if the large opening is wide.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Form of razor larger than the others:
Forma de razori menor:	Forma de razori menor:
Forma de razori lat:	The given text appears to be in an archaic or constructed language that borrows heavily from Romance languages like Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Based on this pattern, here is a translation attempt for the provided line:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.
Forma de lu:	The phrase "Forma de lu:" seems incomplete or like it might be the start of a longer sentence. Based on the pattern from previous translations, it likely relates to describing the form or condition of something, possibly in medical context. However, without additional text, providing an exact translation is challenging. A tentative and literal translation would be:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Forma de razori autra subtil:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Form of instruments with which bones are cut:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Form of incisors or smaller instruments:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Form of another incision tool; this resembling a saw, and the end of it is like a scissors, and it is applied in various places along the ratio of the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And the extremity of it is triangular and has a sharp end. 
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly, all the causes that we have mentioned for razors and scissors and saws should apply.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of the incision of extremities and the suturing of bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	Extremities can be affected either by intrinsic causes or extrinsic causes. If you have treated that corruption with medicinal cure and the cure does not provide relief, or if the corruption continues to spread through the member without any apparent cause, then it is necessary for you to incise that limb where the corruption adheres, so that the patient may be saved from death or severe malice which is a greater defect of the limb.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of that which has affected him is that the limb turns black before it dries, as if fire had already consumed it, or you may observe the blackness spreading before the corruption takes hold within that member affecting him and potentially encompassing the whole body; therefore, pay attention and incise that area.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	Similarly, if the corruption is caused by some venomous creatures such as sea scorpions, vipers, or toads and the like.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or infection is in the extremity of the finger, then you should incise the finger and do not give space for the corruption to spread into the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly if you access the hand, then you incise that of the wrist area, and do not give space for corruption to enter within the arm. 
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if you need to do that, then cut into the arm between the elbow and the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if the corruption spreads further and the swelling is around the knee, then in that case it is the death of the patient; and to administer another cause for this in treatment is an amount of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly treat the foot when corruption invades the toe of the foot, then you incise it between one of the joints.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it affects the arch of the foot, then you incise the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	And if it spreads to the knee, then you incise the thigh between the joint of the knee.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already spread above the knee, then there is no remedy but dismissal, and leave the patient to death.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the method of incising or tying off a limb is that you tighten one band at the part below where you wish to incise, and another band above the area; and have an assistant extend a band below the part, and another assistant extend a band above it; and you separate the flesh between the two bands so that the space in between is completely exposed; then proceed to incise or tie off.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And it is necessary to place cloth over all parts so that the area does not come into contact with anything, and that the patient receives a well-adjusted and properly cauterized lesion.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	If bleeding occurs while you are working, then you should cauterize the area properly, or apply some powders that stop the bleeding; and then continue with your treatment until it is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then bind the affected limb with a bandage that is appropriate, and care for it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I recommend to you what happened to a man in his foot, this accident which both I and you should take note of, which is that the man's foot turned black due to burning that resembled fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption began first in his toe and then spread to the entire foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepared himself for various pus to come out as part of the treatment with the intensity of the pain and burning he experienced, and he amputated that foot up to the joint, and it was healed.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	A long time ago, that same corruption occurred in the index finger of his hand.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then he came to me, and I performed the procedure to remove that excess using some of the medicines that I applied to his hand, followed by cleansing his body; but the excess did not subside and began to spread to another finger and then to the entire hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And the patient urged me to cut off his hand, but I did not want to do so, hoping for the expulsion of that excess fluid, and more so because I feared the cutting off of the dead man's hand, for the strength of the patient was waning.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And after he departed from me, he returned to his land and it came to me that this man prepared and cut open his entire hand, and was healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have added this narrative not only to be helpful regarding what can be done for this illness, and to provide an explanation by which it may be understood and according to which it should be treated.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	About the treatment of the sinuses and the nature of enemas with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess occurs in any fleshy member and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it collects pus, and then it bursts and perforates, and the pus is discharged from it, leaving the place empty like a vessel, and the skin over it resembles a thin cloth, and no further corruption has occurred, and it has not affected the bone or nerves or ligaments, it is called a sinus, and it is not termed a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	However, if the space is prolonged to the point where the corruption affects any member, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the treatment of it is to incise that skin entirely as it twists, especially when it has become thin and resembles cloth, and you must ensure that it does not adhere to the area due to its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	Here is the translation of the provided line:
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And when you consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the arm that you use should have a fragrant odor, then cleanse that area with an Egyptian medicine which consists of equal parts of sweet oil, good vinegar, and resin, mixed together in one vessel, and boil them over fire until the medicine becomes hot and reaches the consistency of honey.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	Then take the amount needed of that medicine and dissolve it in water and honey; cleanse the sinus with this mixture, strengthen the openings of it, and leave the medicine inside for a quantity of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	Then extract that with a scraper; do this for several days until the sinus is cleansed and the pus is completely removed.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And sometimes it is cleansed with ashes water when this medicine is not available to you; in which case, you should take the ashes of vines and put them into water; then boil that and cleanse the sinus with it until you are convinced that it is clean.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the ash water, then cleanse that area with a mixture of water and honey, adding finely ground resin, and also use a mixture of vinegar and honey. The property of honey is to cleanse and wash, while the vinegar helps adhere the sinus, especially when the vinegar has an excess of astringency and dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you do this several times and are satisfied that the sinus is already cleaned out, then cleanse it with something that promotes flesh growth.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And it is that you take some diafinicon ointment and dissolve it with rose oil and stiptic wine; or that you use aclysters with certain medicines and other ointments that have the properties which I have already written about in the treatise on ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the sinus opening is narrow where the enema tube cannot be received, then you should gradually enlarge it with a small instrument, and place cotton wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment inside until it has been enlarged.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And similarly, if the opening is too large, then you should sew the edges together and leave an amount through which the enema can enter additionally.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the opening from which the fluid flows is elevated towards the upper parts, then dry that area at the lowest point where the fluid can flow down, because when the fluid is constrained in the depth of the sinus, the flesh can be generated within it.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinus around the lower bone as you wish, then you must prepare the limb with a treatment that allows the fluid to flow out easily according to what you have at hand and ensure that there is no obstruction causing the fluid to be retained.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidating medicines that should be placed on the sinus appropriately for this purpose, and extend them over a linen cloth.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the cloth should be of such great quantity as is required for the drainage of all the sinus; and then, using scissors, make an incision at the right place in the opening of the sinus, slightly wider than the opening itself; and then spread out another cloth with ointment according to the size of the cut, and place it over the far end of the sinus opening so that the flow from the arm can be alleviated, and do not change the large cloth but only once every few days.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	And the cloth that is over the sinus opening should be changed frequently to ensure that what comes out from the arm is absorbed.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you may know whether what flows from the arm is much or little, or if it is digested or undigested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And with this, you should consider the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if there is an abscess in it.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And as your treatment is prolonged in this manner, when you see the material that has been placed over the sinus opening already adhering or about to adhere, then change it every third day. When you remove the dressing, change the cloth and renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	And if subtle viruses are near the sinus space, do not despair of its adhesion, for its healing is approaching. For some people take a long time to regenerate flesh in their wounds, and for others, the opposite occurs.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if for several days the indigestion has come from the sinus, then you know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and becomes a prolonged cause, then adjust it with the drying properties of medicines, and if the medicines are moist in their substance and virtue, they should be as dry as diafinicon ointment when applied to remove excess addition.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the most recent method of treatment is to take some colchicum ointment and dissolve it in rose oil, and apply it over the affected area as you would with any other ointment on its substance, and then soothe that area with it, and use it accordingly.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And it appears similar in that action, when there is no arm involved, according to the final definition, mix honey when it's appropriate to thicken it and use it; or take myrrh and aloes and frankincense, grind all of them and sprinkle over the honey while it’s on the fire, then apply that mixture onto cloth and bind that over the swelling; and spread that with the honey which you have cooked until it thickened, sprinkle over a cloth and bind that.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And sometimes they are administered with long aristolochia and roots of celestial lilies (and it is the celestial lily) and flour of iron and centaury, use those simples or compounds, grind them and sift them and sprinkle over the honey which has been boiled; and use that.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the swelling is prolonged and does not heal with this treatment, then you know that the corruption is in the vein itself, and now investigate the bones or other hard members or ligaments; now cure it with a fistular treatment, as was said above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	On the treatment of whitlow and inflamed nails, and the addition of incisions to the finger and amputation.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Panarici is an abscess that arises from under the nail of the toe or finger, and it can also occur on other fingers. As it prolongs, its cure becomes less valued; either it becomes a hard abscess, or it gets corrupted, which leads to necrosis under the nail bed, corrupting the entire area, and through this corruption affects the bone causing a foul odor, and ultimately makes the extremity of the finger or toe crooked, with its color turning dark.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And so when you have that case which we have described in the division and your treatment does not agree (or work), then you must incise with iron all the superfluous part that remains of the nail and then cauterize the wound near it, for pointed cautery is beneficial in this.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the edges of the nail are already pressing into the flesh at the points inside, and they begin to pierce and irritate it, then you must place a thin splint under the angle of the nail that is piercing the flesh, and push it up and incise that part of the flesh easily. Place over what remains of the flesh medicines that are combustible and corrosive until all is removed; then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	And if the corruption has already entered into the bone, then you must incise the bone there and extract it, for it will never be healed while the corrupted bone remains inside.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the corrosion and corruption have spread to the finger, then you must incise it at one of the joints according to the likelihood of its recovery, and then treat it until it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	But if the nail has suffered impact or friction, and there is severe pain in it, then at the beginning you must bleed the patient, and then dry the nail with a sharp spatula using a transverse section from top to bottom. Be careful that the cut does not penetrate into the flesh beneath the nail, for you will cause the patient severe pain, which may result in excessive growth of flesh around the area; and then treat that area with something that alleviates pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	However, the finger that is commonly found in many men is largely fleshy throughout, partly bony, and partly nail.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some of them are located at the base of the joint, or their growth is in certain joints of the fingers.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	And he who is born with certain knots in his limbs does not suffer, but he who is born with strong joints is afflicted.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those that are fleshy, the incision is superficial, and it is such that you should incise them slightly at their base with a broad blade.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	But for those whose condition arises at the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; and thus beware of amputating it.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And in one who is born with a deformity of the joints, you must incise at the beginning the flesh around it with a round incision near the bone, and then saw through with one of those appropriate saws for this purpose, and then care for the inside so that it may heal.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And then place between the sheets of the infuser soaked in oil rubbed so that they are not lightly solidified, and separate them, or place between them a thin sheet of lead while they are being solidified as needed.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly, if you encounter swelling on the palm of any hand, then dry that swelling according to how it is prepared and adjust it to the shape of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	From the inception of vices, they are varicose veins. 
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Then it is necessary that you administer a purge of the body from black bile several times with strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	And the treatment for their iron poison is according to two methods: one is that it should be incised and the black blood drawn out, and the other method is that the vein should be raised and all of it extracted.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The sectioning of it is done in this manner: first, wash the thigh with warm water to dissolve the thick blood, which is a feculent substance from the thigh. Then bind the patient's thigh tightly at the part highest on the leg between the joint and below the knee with a bandage. Next, cut the vein at one place, or two, or three places with wide incisions, then raise the black blood with your hand from below the thigh upwards, and downwards to upwards until the amount of blood that you wish has been released and what suffices, and which the patient's strength can tolerate.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	Then give her that [medicine], and command her to abstain from foods that generate black bile.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And repeat the treatment by phlebotomy when the veins are full and inform the patient about this.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	And here is the translation line by line:
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then dry the chain on the right side of the vein by cutting either along its length or at the rear where you feel the pain, or at the very bottom where you find the swelling. 
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then apply the chain with hooks and milk the vein from all sides until it appears to the touch, and you should assess what you see of that area turning black.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And then when you open and from the wound you take out that white string which is like a cord. 
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then you place that part elevated and tilted from the chain, and suspend it with an ounce of lion's fat.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then make another incision near that incision for three fingers' width, and then apply pressure to the area above the vein where it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then elevate that and incise it at the back section below the ankle, and then extract that and lift it until it is protruding through the second incision, and then remove it from the incision that is above that.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do this until you extract that from the highest or uppermost incision of all the incisions, until it is completely protruding; and then incise that.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you cannot extract and elevate it, then insert a needle with a strong double thread and tie it and pull it out, or insert the tip and rotate your hand in all directions until it is loosened.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And be careful that it is not cut; for if it is broken, it will be difficult for you to lift it out, and harm will come to the patient because of that damage.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when you have completely removed it, then place on the wound a cloth soaked in wine and rose oil and unguent, and care for it until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vein is contracted with tortuosity to which it has convolutions in its parts, and it is not straight as we have said, then you must make incisions along all parts of its tortuosity and at the points of its convolution, and then suspend it with hooks until you lift it entirely.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And be careful with your incision so that you do not puncture the vein and do not press it too hard, for it will be difficult for you to lift it; use your discretion in this matter.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The method of making an incision with which a vein is cut:
Forma de unci orp:	Form of a hook instrument:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not sharpened like hooks are, nor does it have a sharp end so that it does not damage the vein; it is of substantial flexibility, for if it were too fine, it would cut the vein due to its fineness; hence, there is excess thickness in it as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	On the extraction of the vein from the leg.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the thighs in warm regions, such as in al-Andalus in the land of Arabs and in the warm and dry lands of India with little moisture, where there is no grass or tree.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And often it is generated in other parts of the body besides the lungs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And the gestation of it is putrefaction that comes from the chain, just as serpents, worms, lice, and other worms are generated between the chain and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of the susceptibility to the occurrence is this vein where you encounter strong inflammation in the chest; then the area becomes blistered; and then the vein starts to emerge from that blistery place which resembles a leaf's rash.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And when the extremity appears, then it is necessary that you wrap around it a piece of lead which weighs one dram, within two drams, and secure that and leave the lead hanging from the beam.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And as many times as you remove something from it due to external causes, wrap that in lead and seal it.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the wound is prolonged, then you cut away a part of it and wrap the remainder; and do not cut that which has been contracted within until it is pushed outwards, for if you cut that which is contracted, it will enter into the flesh and cause an abscess and putrefaction in the area and a bad ulceration.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	For it is necessary that it be treated carefully and extracted little by little until it is completely removed from the wound, so that no cause for it remains in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein, in some men, it extends to a length of five palms and ten, and I have even heard of one reaching twenty palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is cut during its treatment, then insert the needle into the channel of it and pierce that with a long channel through the flesh until all that is in the material is evacuated, and apply putrefaction to the area for several days with medicines; then treat that according to the cure for abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein sometimes has branches, especially when it approaches the joint of the foot or in the foot itself, and it comes out through multiple openings, with a branch extending from each opening.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And therefore treat that condition as we have said in the division and with what has been said above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	About the section on worms generated under the skin and it is called bovine disease.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is named in some places as the bovine disease because small white spots appear on the buttocks, which are worms that originate between the skin and the flesh. They move throughout the body, going up and down, and their presence is felt as they travel from one member to another until they break through the skin and come out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its generation is due to the putrefaction of certain humors, just as worms, serpents, and worms like earthworms and roundworms are generated in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared for its malice, because when it enters the body and rises to the head, reaching the eye, it strongly affects it, entering and destroying the eye, which results in white spots appearing.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And therefore, when you want to treat and extract it, you do so only based on its movement and appearance to the senses. Then you must tightly bind what is above it and below it with strong binding and compression, and then dry it out and extract it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is embedded in the flesh and you do not find it, then place a cautery with fire on the area where it lies, and the greatest fear is corruption of it, by which the area becomes corrupted as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	From the phrase "De sectione super aegritudinem nafir," it seems like we're dealing with instructions or commentary about a surgical procedure related to an illness. Here's my translation attempt:
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This illness is called nafir in our land, and it is pain that comes to certain members, and then moves from member to member.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And I have already seen that second thing which I am going to recount.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was called to see a sick woman in a village, and after uncovering her arm, I saw a small swelling in the vein of her arm. After staying there for about an hour, I observed that this swelling moved as if it were climbing from one place to another, but more lightly than expected, as if it were quicksilver flowing from one location to another.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then it moved to the pain in that area and settled into the muscle, and then it stayed there for about an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then it moved to the other side of the body until it reached the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then she told me that it was moving throughout her entire body as I observed; and I was greatly amazed by its transformation and the speed at which it moved from one member to another.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had seen this before in my other patients in the same manner; however, I have seen many cases where the pain is transferred from one limb to another.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But do not see this with the eyes as in the woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I did not think it to be anything else but that it is because the woman was of old age, or of dry body and exposed veins, in which this condition manifests as a changed wind.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that this reverse cure does not appear in those who are delicate and have a moist body with engorged veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you want to cure him, and the patient feels that pain, then it does not seem to you as we have said, then press on that area lightly and scratch over it until that compressed air comes out, and cauterize the spot.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	If you do not feel it with your hands, then treat that with a body purge and by expelling wind, and medicate those areas with foul-smelling pills and pills of senn and the like. 
De extraccio de sagetas.	Of arrow extraction.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are diverse according to their types, and according to the parts of the body into which they strike, for their diversity is such that some have large points, and small ones, and concave ones, and blunt ones; and among them are those that have three prongs, and those with barbs; and there are also those with crossbars.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And the method that depends on the members and parts into which they strike is in two ways: for the members are either principal organs such as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar ones; therefore when it strikes one of these members and signs of death appear to you, which cause I will describe shortly, then you must avoid extracting the arrow from those in whom death would be certain if extraction were performed under major complications. And when these bad signs do not appear to you, and the arrow is not hidden deep within the member, then you extract it and treat the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And the signs of injury to the skull are when an arrow strikes it, pierces the bone, and exits through the cyphus which is above the brain; for there follows severe pain, blindness, vertigo, burning in the eyes, inflammation and burning of the tongue, spasms, confusion of mind, vomiting bile, rapid loss of speech and destruction of voice, and from the site of the wound comes a white moist substance resembling powder, and the appearance changes to paleness of the skin.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And when these signs appear to you, then abstain from the treatment and extraction of the arrow, unless it is outside.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	And the signs of the arrow when it strikes the heart, so that it is near the left breast, and you feel that it is fixed in a hard place, not a soft one; and the quick movement of the arrow resembles the pulse's movement, and black blood flows from the wound, and there is coldness in the extremities, and a cold sweat, and fainting; therefore, know that death descends swiftly.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the signs when the arrow has wounded the lung are spitting of frothy blood from the wound, and the vessels near the neck become inflamed, and the color of the patient changes, and they exhale large amounts of breath, and demand a draught of fresh air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow strikes the membrane that is in the feet, and the pain is near the small ribs, and there is a great swelling with intense pain and sighing, and not all the muscles of the limbs are affected.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if you find a dart (or arrow) in the stomach, then remove it from the infected area along with any undigested food. 
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the arrow is embedded in the belly, and it has pierced him, make some incision at the wound site, or on the skin, or on the intestine which is ruptured, and there is no hope for the extraction of the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow pierces the bladder, and urine flows out, and some process causes it to spread outward from the wound, and severe pain is felt by the patient, then you know that it is mortal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	And the other parts as well, such as the face, neck, jaw, shoulders, armpits, vertebrae of the back, collarbone, thigh, and arm and members like them, are saved according to the major dispositions when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery and is not a venomous arrow.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I will recount to you what I have seen about the nature of these arrows, so that you may understand this in relation to your treatment.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause is as follows: in a man, an arrowhead was embedded in the lacrimal duct of his eye near the root of the nose, and I extracted it from the other side, leaving the groove of his ear intact, and he was healed, without any harm to his eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I extracted another arrow from a Jew, which had struck him in the groove of his eye, leaving the eyelid more intact. The arrow was already hidden, and only a small part of it could be reached to which the shaft adhered. It was a large sharp arrow of the Turks, with a lion-shaped iron head that had no fletching.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And it is beneficial for the patient, and not accidental that a bad accident occurs in his illness.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man who had been shot in the throat, and it was an Arabic arrow, which is the kind with ears; and then I made an incision around it between two cartilages, and it was already submerged in his throat; and then I delicately manipulated it with that, and then extracted it, thus healing the Christian.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And I extracted another arrow from a man who had been shot in his abdomen, and it was thought that he would die because of it; and thus, after thirty days had passed and there was no change in his condition due to any treatment, I made an incision around the arrow and worked on it, and he recovered, and no further mishap befell him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw another man in whom an arrow had embedded itself in his back, and the wound had become solidified over it; and after approximately seven years, the arrow was embedded in the root of his hip.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman in whom an arrow had embedded itself in her abdomen, and the wound had become solidified within her, with no change in its condition over time, and the woman did not suffer any harm in any of her natural functions.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And you see another man in whom an arrowhead is embedded in his face and the wound has healed and break the arrowhead, not finding any pain here, and similar cases are seen with this.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And extract the arrow from the man of the king's guards who was shot in the middle of his nose and had slightly shifted to the right side, and the entire arrow was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called for the treatment of him shortly after the arrow wound within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I found the arrow wound very narrow; and then I probed it with a fine needle, but did not feel anything; however, he felt a pricking in his right ear, and then I suspected that this pricking was due to the tip of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I applied a poultice to the area using a plaster that has attractive and digestive properties, believing that the area will become inflamed so as to reveal the location of the arrow, causing it to emerge from there.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And no significant accident occurred in the area where the arrow had reached; and I continued with the plaster on it for many days, and no accident happened; the wound consolidated during this time, and the patient was relieved of the distress from it for several days until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose and reported this to me.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then I applied an acute corrosive medicine to the wound for many days until it opened up, and with a probe, I examined that area, and found the tip of the arrowhead, which was attached to the shaft.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then I adjust in the incision of the wound with that sharp medicine until the tip of the arrow becomes visibly apparent to me, and I proceed at my own pace with this method for a period of time between four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And then increase the burn to amplify it, and it becomes possible to insert the scissors into it, and remain there, and do not obey the excretion, for I did not cease to refine and ingeniously operate on that in various ways of invention, until one day I succeeded in extracting it using forceps skillfully made, according to how the form of those will be shown at the end of the chapter, before extracting it; and then restore that wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored, but I have restored it and the wound is consolidated, and the patient is healed completely, and there was no issue with it for any reason.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recommend to you the quality of extraction of some arrows because it gives that rule and significance on what I have not said, for the parts of this art and the definitions of those are not understood through narration nor do they comprehend those in the book.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot;
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore I say that arrows are not removed from the limbs in which they are embedded except in two ways: either by attraction to the place where they enter; or by the opposite of the other part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is expelled from where it entered, or is a discharge coming out of fleshly parts, and is thrown and forced out.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if you do not obey the suggestion of the hour in which to cut, then it is necessary that you leave it for several days until the flesh around it rots and the attraction of it is lessened and its exit is eased.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And similarly, if it is embedded in bone and you do not follow the suggestion, then leave that for several days and repeat the process with attraction and motion each day, and it will be forced out.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you do not follow the suggestion for several days, then it is necessary that you perforate around the area of the discharge in that bone from all sides with a fine drill until the area is widened, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the discharge is embedded in the bone of the head and has already progressed into one of the brain's ventricles, and the patient exhibits several of those symptoms that I mention, then abstain from extracting the discharge and leave it until its condition stabilizes for several days; because if the discharge reaches the spinal cord, death will not be long in coming.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is not embedded in the body of the bone only and does not pass into the marrow, and the patient remains for several days without any accidents occurring to them from those causes, then you should attend to the entry point of the arrow and the entry site itself.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrowhead is already embedded in the part of the body and is not felt, then you should seek it by probing, and if you feel it, then pull it out using suitable levers that are appropriate for extraction.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot do so because of the constriction of the wound and the length of the arrow, and here there are no bones or nerves or veins, then you should incise the wound until it is widened and it becomes possible to extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if there are earrings with which it is held, then you should release the flesh in which it is embedded from all sides with all the means you can; and devise a method for this, if you cannot remove the flesh due to the fracture of the earrings or their twisting so that they remain stuck.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any location where it is lodged, then you should use the strength of your hand with forceps in all directions until it obeys; and be subtle with the utmost subtlety so that the arrow does not break and that the extraction from it and its removal becomes difficult for you.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot do it at that moment, then you should wait for several days until the parts around it can soften, and then repeat the procedure when it has been alleviated.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	And if bleeding occurs contrary to expectations, then you should administer what has been said about treatment in the previous chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And observe the source of the wound, whether it is from a vein or nerve, or a tendon, and administer help in every possible way to prevent the escape of blood; and do this with ease, tranquility, slowness, and firmness as I have recommended to you.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And therefore, make the wound contract so that the patient is according to the figure in which you should apply the heat of the cautery to them, for it is more beneficial.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	And if this is not possible for you, then administer whatever is possible for you according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	However, for wounds that are displaced by the opposite side or where you have already processed some part to the external parts, or if the tip of the wound becomes viscous due to the sensation from the part above the prescribed chain and sometimes protrudes; then you should cauterize over it; and let the cautery be according to the amount that the forceps take; and then pull it out, for it is made lightly to come out.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if it is retained in the bone, then you twist the arrow according to opposition so that the arrowhead presses into the bone, and widen it by inserting yourself, and then extract it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if not, leave it for several days, and then repeat that procedure before it comes out again.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the shaft of the arrow is in there, then you push it out with it.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	But if the shaft has been removed and you want to administer force, then insert into it, if it is deafened (blunt), a conical instrument so that it enters the concavity of the wound at the base of the arrow, and then push it out with it.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	But if the arrow is concave, then you push it out with a strong instrument inserted into it, for the arrow is loosened by that.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the arrow is embedded, then you must indent all the flesh in which it is lodged, if that is possible for you, and then treat it with whatever is appropriate.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the arrow falls into the foot, or in the abdomen, or in the bladder, or in the side, and is close enough that you can touch it with your hand, and it is possible for you to cut around it, then cut around it and be careful not to injure any veins or nerves, and extract it, and then treat the wound if necessary, and care for it until it is healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	The given text seems to be in a medieval or old Romance language, which is likely derived from Latin and shares similarities with Italian, Spanish, French, and possibly other related languages. Here's the translation for the provided sentence:
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And from those are made various spices, large, small and medium-sized, according to the quantity of the size of the disease and its severity, and the extent of the wound, and the constriction of it.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Form of treatment for a deaf extremity:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	And in this way, so that the instrument inside him is lightened in the concave groove and is pushed by it.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	From the text provided and its structure, it seems like an old medical manuscript written in a Romance language that mixes elements from Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Here is my translation of the given line:
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins for phlebotomy from which it is customary to bleed are thirty, of which sixteen are on the head. There are two pulse veins near the ears, called alhasisain; two herbs that are in the temples; and two veins that are in the tear ducts of both eyes, called aspicientz; a vein prepared in the middle of the forehead; and a vein at the tip of the nose; two veins on the neck; two veins on the upper lip; two veins on the lower lip; — these are the veins called algelic; and there are two veins behind the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	Here is the translation line by line of the provided text:
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot and thigh there are three veins; one of those is below the curvature of the heel of the wild leg; and the second is sophena, and its location is below the thigh of the tame leg; and the sciatic vein, and its location is below the thigh of the wild leg; and in the thigh are other veins similar to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The healing of veins near the ears is for cleansing ancient and foreign, scaly and ulcerous conditions of the head that are old.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of bloodletting these is according to what I recommend to you: it is that the head of the patient be shaved, and the head of the patient should be rubbed at the back of the head where both veins are with a wide cloth with good friction; then strain the patient's neck with a band in such a way that the two [veins] and their locations appear near the ears in two places from under the hair; and search for those [veins] with your finger, and if you feel the pulse of those [veins] with your finger here, it is a sign to attempt [the bloodletting].
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then take the lancet, which is appropriate for this purpose, and then insert it into the vein in the crook of the arm until the bloodletting needle reaches the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	Then elevate your hand with the vein and the arm toward the parts above, and incise the vein with an appropriate incision.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And let the length of the incision be the width of two fingers together or around that; and let as much blood flow as you desire.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then press with a pillow and leave it until it is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And it has already been mentioned at the beginning of the book about these and their cauterization.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	And of the two arteries that are in the temples, the help of bloodletting is against migraine, ancient and malevolent, and frequent ophthalmia and acute excesses of fluid effused into the eyes.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of bloodletting from those [arteries] is as I recommend to you: constrain the patient's head with a band so that the two arteries become visible by clear perception and their pulse can be demonstrated by placing your finger there; and then you should attempt it.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then you lift the chain above the vein with your index finger at the parts above, and insert the bloodletting instrument beneath it, elevating the vein upward; and incise it in this way as you have done with the other two veins; and let blood flow according to the quantity needed.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then release the compression on the patient, and place your finger on the vein for about an hour; then apply a cloth and powder to it and tightly bind it above with strong pressure, and leave it until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And already preceded is the recollection of them, and of those the inscription, and the attraction at the beginning of the book.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And thus the treatment of phlebotomy of the frontal vein is similar to the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein for ancient diseases of the face and migraine and fever and foul ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of the phlebotomy is as I recommend to you: so that the patient holds their neck with a band until the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is called a lancet, of which this is the form:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Place the point that is at the head of the leech over that vein and strike it with a lancet or another instrument in the manner described, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you desire; then close the puncture wound of the patient and ensure that it heals.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And sometimes it is opened with a vein puncture instrument, but the point of this vein puncture instrument does not need to be sharp like other similar instruments; instead, its tip should be blunt. Pierce that area transversely because the bone is very close and strong, and you might break the vein puncture instrument if it were thin.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	However, the treatment of the two veins that are near the tear ducts of both eyes for eye ailments caused by itching and inflammation in the eyes, and for facial illnesses.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	The method of the vein puncture is that the patient should hold their head with a bandage, and then perform the puncture; you should stand above the patient's head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And the vein puncture should be performed transversely, a little along the length with a small vein puncture instrument, because there is no flesh in that area; and if the vein puncture instrument is thin, its tip might break easily.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then let blood flow as much as is necessary for you, and place a bandage over those areas, bind them tightly for one night, and then loosen them.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	And the phlebotomy of the nasal vein is suitable for acute fever and violent heat, and for diseases of the face and migraine and swelling that occur in the face, especially when it is chronic.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of the phlebotomy is such that the patient should hold their head, and then you place your left hand on their nose, take a thin long flebotomi (bloodletting instrument), and insert it into the middle part of the nasal tip precisely, because the vein is not noticeable to the touch there, and blood will start to flow immediately.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	You must gradually withdraw your hand with the small flebotomi and let blood flow according to your need; then bind it for one night, because it heals quickly.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	However, the bloodletting from both arms can lead to constriction of the airways and the beginning of leprosy and various diseases, impetigo, and severe corrosive ulcers, such as herpes.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of the phlebotomy for those is that the patient should stretch each one out on their side with a bandage; and the surgeon stands over the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a stool.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And then perform venesection on the vein with a small, wide-lipped lancet little by little; and then extract blood in a tempered quantity or according to what you deem necessary for that situation; and then do the same with the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then loosen the ligature and moderately tighten the two veins with a medium-sized tourniquet so that the patient is not suffocated, and leave it in place until the wound is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the benefit of bloodletting from the larger veins is that it helps with small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums, bad ulcers and cracks, and also bad ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the procedure for bloodletting from those veins is that you place the patient in front of you, and tighten a band around their neck. Then, part their lips and look at the two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the second on the left; the identification of each is by the darkness of each of them, and this is more evident where small black veins are found around them. And then incise each vein with an appropriate incision.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	And if you have doubt about it and do not know which one of those [areas] to choose, then proceed with the incision on the larger of those areas, and from there expel the evident pus.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make an appearance of the two veins that are on the lips above. 
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	And it is more customary rather to incise the two veins that are in the fold of the thigh.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	And for two veins that are beneath the tongue, the treatment is close to phlebotomy of the cephalic vein for precursors that are in the jaw area, for illness of the uvula, and illnesses of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of fleubotomar them is that you follow the patient between your hands before the sun, and lift their tongue, and look at it from one side to vein and from the other side to vein, and the color of each declines towards black.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then bleed each one; and be careful not to keep your hand too long while bleeding them, because those are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the veins that are bled in the calf are those where it is customary for all men, and their bleeding is done in two ways: either by placing a sharp flebotome (bloodletting instrument) with a fine point; or by cutting with a flebotome shaped like a small knife, and this is called alnessil, and this is the form of it:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this instrument is what you need for the incision, and of those, select thin and subtle ones according to the width of the veins and according to the constriction of them.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of flebotomy mercury:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	Place his side in such a way as is needed, and it is necessary to open the concave veins that are full and contain clearly visible thick blood, and those which hold thick, clotted blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the method of olive oil flebotomy:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this flebotomi (phlebotome) is of lesser width and finer tip, and it is suitable for phlebotomy of fine veins that contain thin blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	And the benefit of the phlebotomy of the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: for you extract the blood from the diseases that lie below the jaw and neck, and from what affects the feet and abdomen.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it is necessary for the phlebotomist, when performing phlebotomy, to be very careful and have great caution in that area because there lies an artery; if he makes a mistake and punctures the artery instead of the vein during phlebotomy, he will cut that artery and cause a flow of blood, so it is necessary not to perform phlebotomy with a sharp instrument but rather with a cutting tool as needed.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilic vein does not appear by clear manifestation, then you must leave that area and move to another, or seek some other suitable spot; or perform phlebotomy at the end of the arm where it is visible; and cut into that area with a blunt instrument as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	But if you wish to perform phlebotomy on the patient, then it is necessary before binding the arm that you touch the area between where you know the pulse points are, and then press on it with your thumb; then bind the arm and cut the vein with a concave incision using a blunt instrument as we have said; and be careful not to hit the artery with any part of the puncture.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you see, as you tighten the bandage, swelling in the place where you have pressed with your finger, then that swelling is arterial swelling, and therefore it should be treated accordingly.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you see the blood flow during phlebotomy as clear as a child's urine, and the blood is fine and red, then know that it is arterial blood; and then you wait and place your finger on it for a long time; and then remove your finger, and if the blood stops flowing in bursts, as it stops and starts multiple times, then strengthen the arm and leave it alone.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And protect the patient from his own discharge, and be over-watchful of him and do not let that happen for several days until he is healed. 
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	If the blood is not constricted and sometimes when you need medicine for this it is not present, then cut into the artery if it appears to you; for the extremity contracts and the blood is constricted; or take a piece of fig bark, prepare that, take one half and bind that over the site of the vein with constriction using a bandage and use a pillow between on the next day. 
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And when the blood is stopped, it is good; and if not, then treat that with what precedes the memory of the place of the bleeding powder flux.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the bleeding of the patient is difficult in many conditions because of the small area of the wound and the possibility of movement of the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors;
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And in phlebotomy (bloodletting), it is necessary to be aware of the artery above which the patient's vein lies, because this is a nerve; and if during the puncture for bloodletting you hit this nerve, paralysis will occur in the patient, and it is difficult for them to recover, and often they are not cured completely. This nerve sometimes appears as a sensation; and if it is hidden from some people and is subtle and does not show itself, then you must place the phlebotomy needle with which you perform bloodletting using a slice of alnessil (a type of wood), and avoid the nerve with your skill.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then you should incise the vein along its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The benefit of performing phlebotomy on the cephalic vein is that it attracts blood from the head and provides relief to diseases of the eyes.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And it is proper in this case, if you want to perform phlebotomy, to use an olive phlebotome or a myrtle phlebotome; for it is the safest method for all veins, as it does not touch the artery or nerves.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	However, you must be careful with phlebotomy and ensure that you do not puncture only the head of the vein with the phlebotome; instead, seek a lighter spot, and do not hit it hard unless it is found upon the first percussion, which should be done several times before making the incision with the phlebotome.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, it often happens that a clot forms in some people when phlebotomy is not performed on the first attempt. Do not puncture that clot forcefully.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	However, the quality of the phlebotomy and its effects must be considered in their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first line of the text is about phlebotomy and its proper administration. Here's the translation:
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And if phlebotomy is performed, it should be done on the third day or at the earliest after three hours have passed since the morning.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	More phlebotomy which is administered, more when it brings convenience and necessity for that, whether by night or day, at any hour and in any time.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And it is necessary that a child not be circumcised until they have reached fourteen years, and a pregnant woman should not be circumcised except from the fourth month until the seventh, and elderly women should not be circumcised who have already passed sixty years.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And when someone wishes to undergo bloodletting by any method whatsoever, it is necessary to cleanse their intestines before the bloodletting with a lion's cathartic, if there are retained faecal remnants within them, so that the veins do not draw superfluous substances into the bloodletting of the cleansed intestines, which could harm the principal limbs.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And let not the patients be bloodlet during sacred rites and drunkenness, nor while they are suffering from illness or intoxication until those conditions have been alleviated, nor with dropsy. Moreover, bloodletting should be feared near colic pain and vomiting, and near swelling of the belly, and near multiplication of coitus and labor and exercise of fasting or wakefulness, and any cause that diminishes strength, whether corporal or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And furthermore, consider the purification of humors before this if the blood is thick, through foods and drinks, and through medications if that is possible for this purpose.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And furthermore, take a bath if there is no cause prohibiting it, or exercise in some activity so that the blood may be refined.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And perform the bloodletting on him in the morning around the hour of terce, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And it is necessary that the foot of that patient be guarded on that day from all harmful animal accidents, such as anxiety, anger, fear, and from all physical strains, such as excessive work, sorrow, and similar things.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And in its proper place, let the causes be present that are usually used by people with aromatics and fragrances and with balms and similar things according to the quantity of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the phlebotomist onto a cushion that is higher than the cushion of the one who is to be bled.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And then extend their arm, and the phlebotomist should rub that area with his hand two or three times; then tighten the ligature with a strap and wrap it around twice.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And let the binding be moderate, for if the binding is not equal, or the binding is with excess, then you prevent blood flow; or it is with softening, and then you prevent the body's blood from escaping.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And before the binding, it is necessary that the person to be bled should rub their hands together until the veins are swollen and clearly visible.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And then the phlebotomist should anoint their lancet properly with a little olive oil; and then place the index finger of their left hand on that vein, leaving the spot where they want to perform the phlebotomy, so that the vein protrudes slightly, and the pulsation is evident because among the veins you find one like a string protruding, which should be phlebotomized, and those full of air will contract when the lancet is placed on them, thus avoiding them; and if the lancet does not penetrate the vein easily, that one is narrow.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And thus, for this reason, it is necessary that the phlebotomist be firm and attentive in all these matters.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And then remove the flebotomi [flebotomi likely refers to a bloodletting instrument], but if the vein is cut in one attempt, that's good; and if not, you repeat this another time leaving that spot a little, or apply a compress over it if the area is not inflamed.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the area is inflamed, or the patient shows fear, then you leave it for one day or two, and do not tighten the bandage, because doing so could attract more inflammation quickly, nor should they enter a bath.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And then repeat the bloodletting if necessary.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the incision is small and blood flows subtly, and you fear that not enough blood will be let out as desired, then you repeat the bloodletting in that area slightly adjusted near the incision, and do this with a compress before the area becomes inflamed, because in many cases, inflammation results from a small incision.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	But if the area is already inflamed, then do not repeat the procedure there, because it does not serve any purpose; and place some part of an ointment over it, because it alleviates the body from blood.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better in this place to use oil and the other ointments.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And similarly, administer a mixture of oil in all phlebotomies with which you bleed the veins to prevent the flow of blood from the body, and apply theriac, aloes, and sage when one of these is placed on the area, for the blood is refined and coagulates when it is thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if a large abscess is generated at the site of phlebotomy, which often happens, especially to those who have not been bled except for that time, or near the weak vein, then you should cover it and place on the area a sponge soaked in water and salt, slightly warmed, and keep it there for an hour, as it dissolves [the abscess].
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And it is necessary to do this near the emergence of blood from that vein with a sufficient amount from it or another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if some blackness or greenness remains in the area for several days, do not worry about it; and if you wish, apply to that area some mixture of aloes and myrrh dissolved, or some mixture of juice from mint or calamint, or something similar.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And when white spots appear, incisions or swellings should be treated by bloodletting from the basilic vein.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And then place your hand on that area, and if you find softness there, apply your compression to it, because when that prominence is bad and harmful; then be careful not to press on it for any reason we have mentioned, because strong pressure will cause blood to flow from the artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And make a poultice with something that is astringent, so that the area becomes hardened, and then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And it is necessary to withdraw blood from every person according to the quantity of their strength and according to the predominant color in their blood as it appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	For if the blood is black, you should let it flow until it becomes red; and similarly, if you find it thick, you should let it flow until it becomes thin; and in the same way, if it is sharp, you should let it flow until its acuteness is reduced.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And for those who are full and strong and have a need for blood extraction in one session, the incision of the vein should be enlarged and the bloodletting should be extensive.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And in that which is inflamed, the opposite should be done of what was mentioned, and it must be drained in frequent doses, and the treatment should be strict.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best that is administered in venesection is that the cut should be transverse, not a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this method of venesection is safe from blood flow and nerve injury, and it is more praiseworthy and safer than venesection according to latitude and longitude. 
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And in cases where fainting is accustomed to occur before bloodletting, you must treat this condition before the bloodletting with a bit of bread infused in pomegranate juice or in heated simple hydromel; and extract the blood in three or four stages.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if it is inflamed due to a complex condition, then take before bloodletting an infusion in myrrh syrup or in aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and the like, or in an aromatic and sweet-smelling syrup.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if you accidentally cause fainting due to bloodletting, and it is caused by the loss of much blood, then one must drink water mixed with meat broth and a sweet-smelling subtle syrup; and use aromatics like algalea, and anoint their feet with that.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the section on fainting due to evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And for those who wish to thin their blood and dissolve it gradually, it is suitable for the person for whom bloodletting is a significant evacuation, and its property is cold, which evacuates blood little by little, according to the strength of its property over consecutive days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	But for those who wish to thin their blood and repeat the bloodletting, and whose body is strong, this should be done approximately seven or nine hours after the first bloodletting.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	And if one wishes to draw blood from the body contrary to the part towards which it declines, it must be done on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	Here is the translation of the given text line by line into English:
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And when you want to release the arm and evacuate the blood for a second time, since the vein’s orifices are already closed and it is difficult to let the blood flow out, that you press upon it with vehemence and slightly extend the bent part, for this is too harmful.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Here is the translation of the given sentence line by line into English:
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is inflamed, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the inflammation has subsided.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if the necessity to perform secondary bloodletting arises and it is not avoidable, then you should bleed from that area or in the other arm at a different vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called the "sinew of the arm" is incised at the site of the fossa or the basilic vein, when those are not found or are hidden, because it is composed of those veins.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of the bloodletting is such that the patient should dip their hand in warm water until the pulse reddens and the vein becomes clearly visible.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And then apply moderate tension to that area with a bandage; and then perform the bloodletting transversely, not longitudinally or latitudinally.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And let the incision be wide and perform the bloodletting such that you make the cut slightly above the joint of the hand.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of blood is stopped, then you should dip your hand in warm water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve what you need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	And if you were in the days of summer, then you are excused from dipping your hand in warm water, and instead, the body should be placed in warm water during the winter time.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than that of all other veins, because it does not have a pulsating artery or nerves near it.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the phlebotomy of the vein in the right hand is pertinent to diseases of the liver.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of the phlebotomy is that you stretch your hand with a bandage or with your hand, after which you have placed it in hot water, until the vein is swollen and clearly visible; then perform the venesection transversely; and if you cut through completely, do not damage this excessively.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And ensure that you do not remove your hand during the phlebotomy, because at that point the nerves of the fingers are exposed and without flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And then wash your hand in warm water and let the blood flow into it, for if you do not wash that area with warm water, the blood will clot at the vein's opening, and this is prohibited from flowing.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when the blood is drawn according to the necessary amount, then you place oil and salt on the vein so that it does not close too quickly; and similarly, you should do this along the entire straight path of the vein.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	However, the benefit of performing bloodletting from the left hand is that it is beneficial for illnesses of the head.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do similarly in the bloodletting of the thigh as you have done in the other [area].
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the benefit of bloodletting from the vein saphena is for illnesses in the lower part of the body, such as ailments of the uterus, and for the retention of menses, and for diseases of the rheumatic and ulcerous conditions of the thighs and old sores on the legs, and similar kinds of illnesses.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of phlebotomy for him is that the patient immerses his foot in warm water and performs friction on it until the veins become visible; then bind around the ankle with a strap; and at the site where the vein clearly appears, you should mark it, from which point it branches out into several veins on the surface of the foot.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And thus perform puncture or incision to remove the pus from beneath the heel and away from the accumulation of it, for that is better and safer.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you perform a puncture on the surface of the foot, then be careful of the nerves that are located in that area on the surface of the foot, and carry out your puncture such that you do it across, as if you were going to cut through.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And let the puncture be gentle.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	But if bleeding is prohibited; then soak the foot in warm water and let the blood flow into it until it is evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the puncturer makes a mistake on the first attempt, then repeat the puncture slightly above it, for the area is salty; and do not fear any mischief, but be careful of the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And similarly, do the same with the poultice on the other foot.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And regarding the sciatic vein, the area, as we have said, is behind the ankle below the malleolus of the outer part of the leg.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the treatment of the puncture is for hip pain when it is caused by blood.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient enters into a bath, and he should stretch out his thigh on the side where the incision will be made above the ankle with four fingers under a long thin bandage, for it appears only in this way.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And so when it appears, then you perform phlebotomy on that according to the constitution of the patient and transversely, which is better; or incise that through an incision or cut that through a section, for the location is favorable. 
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is in many men greatly swollen; and if you find that [swelling], and it does not appear to the senses as a whole, then incise some branch of it, which appears on the back of the foot instead of the area where the little toe and ring toe would be.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And be careful of the nerves, and let as much blood flow as you wish.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Then release the constriction and place a bandage over the area of the phlebotomy, keeping the area tight, as it heals quickly.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Regarding ventosization and the qualities of using them. 
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And bleeding is performed in two ways: one of them is by scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is bleeding without scarification.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this bleeding that is without scarification is performed in two ways, either with fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the bleeding sites that are administered with scarification and extraction of blood include fourteen areas of the body, among which one area where bleeding is applied is alnocrati, which is the back part of the head; and another location is on both sides of the neck; and bleeding at the chin below the jaw, just below the mouth; and bleeding from both temples; and bleeding from alohoster, which is above the end of the spine; and bleeding from both armpits, which are from both arms; and bleeding from both calves; and bleeding from both thighs.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And bleeding does not extract blood from the small scattered veins in the flesh, and by doing so, it does not diminish their strength as it happens with phlebotomy; nor should bleeding be performed with or without fire in any disease caused by accumulation until the whole body is evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	And if the necessity arises due to illness or habit causing gas accumulation, administer that at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, in the middle of the month, and at any time.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	Here is the translation of the provided text line by line:
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore when you encounter any of those causes, and specifically if it is in the third month or a bit later, then I command that ventilation be performed more than two or three hours after passing.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And the treatment for swelling of the neck is that when you apply gravity to the head and submerge it in water; but it must be done near the evacuation of the whole body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this cupping is in the place of venesection of the cephalic [vein].
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not good for someone of a cold temperament to use it, or in those who have a catarrh, because it brings great harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And by this, there is no need for the use of those old methods, and in which heads are fresh illnesses.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	When wind of alcohol is in the place of phlebotomy of the saphenous vein and basilic vein: by this you treat asthma, and constriction of breath, and rupture of the windpipe, and cough, and accumulation.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And it is necessary to expel the wind from the body with a little alcohol, for if it is left in place, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the venting of alhagdahan (a term that seems to refer to some form of wind or air) confers relief to pains in the head, and to ophthalmia, and migraine, and suffocation, and to pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is used instead of trephination of the skull.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And you must command the ventozador (one who performs venting or bloodletting) not to press his hand too forcefully so as not to cut into the artery and cause a flow of blood.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And venting from the chin confers relief to alcohol in the mouth, and to corruption of the gums, and to symptoms similar to diseases that are in the mouth, and it serves as a替代这里的trephination of areas around the lips. 
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	And the puffing that is done over the two spatulas you confer to cataplasma, which is made by the collection of warmth.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the inflation of both parts inside the follicles contributes to the effectiveness of phlebotomy of three veins, that is, the basilic, saphenous and cephalic, because those attract blood from all the smaller veins that are in the flesh, and those small veins from the other larger veins until the attraction reaches the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the surgeon not to proceed too much in scarification, for the area is devoid of flesh, and leave its nerves and arteries alone.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is a leech with which bloodletting is performed on the legs and applied to the hemorrhoids of the anus and the pus-filled ulcers.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And you must command the bloodletter to make a large bleeding, and it should be with cupping, for the area requires strong drying; and strongly perform the subtle cupping and let it be scarified with scarification.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	Here is the translation of the given sentence line by line into English:
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, fever weakens the entire body and causes fainting in many people.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And for the treatment of hiccups, it is commonly applied to the hiccups by treating the two sides of the chest. 
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the cupping is that you place the cup at the beginning so it swells and draws out the corrupted fluid quickly, and do not prolong the placement of the cups, but rather place them lightly, and remove them courteously, so that the humors come to the surface as intended.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease to repeat this and continue until you see the area already reddened and swollen, and the roughness of the blood appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And now you should scratch the area and gradually repeat the suction, then consider the disposition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	For that person who has tender flesh with few pores, you should scratch them once and not more, so that the area does not become ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And instruct the cupper to increase the scratching slightly and moderately, and perform the suction with ease.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the blood is thick, then you must scratch twice, for in the first scratching, the path for the subtlety of the blood and its moisture is opened.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	But in the second examination obtained from the extraction of thick blood. 
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the blood is heavily tainted or foul, then a third incision should be made so that the last of it may be purged. 
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And finally, when we want to extract blood slowly or in small amounts, a scarification is enough for us.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we do so with a large scarification; and if we know that the blood is thick, then we must scarify with a deep scarification.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term "scarification" refers solely to the depth of the cut.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the veins are thick, hard, dark, and their pores are narrow, it is necessary that the areas for cupping be anointed with more soothing, opening, and resolving substances; if it is summer, such as aloes oil or violet oil, or double fennel oil, or coltsfoot oil; and if it is winter, then narcissus oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or blood oil, and similar ones.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the excess is thick and cold, then the oil should be Amarant oil, or Balsamita oil, or Aloes oil, or Anise oil, and similar ones.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	And if the person suffering from large pores of tender flesh, then it must be prohibited to use oil, and one must wash the places where the blisters are formed with warm water or cold spring water, or water from chicory, or water from burdock, and similar things for these. 
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And for the person whose blood is of somewhat high moisture content, wash their swellings with sour wine, or with water mixed with myrtle and sumac and similar substances.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And for the person whose excesses are thick, wash their swellings with old wine, or with water mixed with savory, which is marjoram, or from the decoction of anise, or chamomile, and similar substances.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And it is necessary to protect the swelling before bathing; sweating should be induced just before the bath, about one or two hours prior, and they should sleep close to when the swelling occurs.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	And it is necessary to regulate the bloodletting before the swelling occurs. 
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	Consider at the beginning: if the blood-letter or he who is to be bled has choleric temperament and there is sharp blood and inflammation, then cooling remedies must be taken, such as sour pomegranates, bitter endive, vinegar, lettuce, dried cucumber, and julep, and similar things.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And pause their foods such as sausages, and meats of service birds, and seasoned dishes with sour ingredients, and similar items.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And for those whose constitution is cold, they should drink syrup of almonds or syrup of dried cucumber seeds, and sumac, and wine moderately mixed between old and new; and it is recommended that they use moderation in drinking and eating, and avoid foods such as sausages, cucumbers, beans, small birds, and pigeons.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And on the day of bloodletting and venesection, drinking should be more than eating.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And it should be given to drink at certain times to some people, theriac alpharac, or medicines of musk, such as mastic, or acetit before bloodletting or before venesection or afterwards, so that the main limbs are comforted and the blood is made subtle; and they should not take those heated substances.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	May the bloodletting that is performed as a form of scarification be done on areas such as the liver, and on the thighs and gout-prone regions, and around the navel, at the sites of the knees, and in the armpits, for these members cannot tolerate being directly scarified.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not desired for those but the suction of blood from a member, just as placing a cupping glass on the breast in the illness of nasal bleeding; and they use that to dissolve cold viscous air trapped within the limb, similar to placing it over the abdomen and navel; because that rarefies the limb, warms it, and removes pain when resolving air.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is already placed on the lungs when you encounter their obstruction or phlegm, for by the power of strong suction it overcomes the obstruction and removes the phlegm from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And similarly, it acts when placed on the liver and spleen to expel air that is trapped within those organs.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these cupping glasses are applied only with suction; and sometimes they are applied with heat.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And sometimes they are applied filled with tepid water in the illnesses of the spleen.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And this is done so that the cupping glass may be filled and become larger, whether it is hot water alone or water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of cupping administered with fire: the diameter of the opening should be two fingers wide, as we have formed it; and the quantity of air should be half a palm; and it should be placed on his side, in the area that is within the circuit, halfway along; the hole should be small enough to let an needle enter.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Here is the translation of the given line:
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And place in the middle of a horizontal bar of iron or of wood, where a candle with fire is placed.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this cupping glass is larger than the one we have recommended; and it should be smaller than that according to the illness and the age of the person using it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the cupping glasses for children and those who are weak are different from the cupping glasses for young adults and those with large bodies.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of applying this cupping glass with fire on the limb is to extend the wick with decent firewood in front of a small candle flame, and place that in the middle of the transverse rod at the center of the cupping glass, so that the fire is lit around it without burning the patient's body.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And then it should be placed on the patient's limb, with the finger over the spot we have mentioned. However, when you have the cupping glasses and do not need to hold the finger so that vapor rises above that spot, the cupping glass will soon become loose.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And then light the wick according to its method, and repeat that if you need to do so.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	And for the treatment with suction cups in the illness of pleurisy, using water, in which there is no crosspiece or frame, and it is not administered except when it is filled with water, and it is placed on the limb only temporarily.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is its form: And this cupping device, the larger it is, the better, because it can receive a large quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Capitol .xcvii.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Bloodletting is not administered in many parts of the body but only in those parts where it's not possible to apply cupping, due to their small size, such as the penis and gums and similar areas; or in parts devoid of flesh, such as the fingers and nose and their equivalents.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those leeches that you have found in the waters, which are clean from putrefaction.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	Then they should be left day and night in clean water until they become hungry, and ensure that no impurities remain in their bodies; then the body should be cleansed at the beginning with bloodletting and cupping; then rub the patient's limb until it reddens; then place them on [the affected area].
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are full and fall off.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to draw out the affected area with a cupping device, it is more beneficial for healing.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, then wash the area with vinegar and then with clean water; and it should be rubbed and squeezed.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the flow of blood is extended near the site where leeches are attached, and if it continues to ooze, then you should soak a cloth in cold water, and place that over it until the oozing stops.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the blood is multiplied (flows excessively), then sprinkle on it finely ground vitriol or gall and similar astringents until the bleeding stops; or place the pods of cooked beans over the area, leaving them until the beans adhere to the spot, and the bleeding will stop.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And it is necessary, if repeated application of leeches is required, to change them when possible.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if leeches are prohibited due to suspension (likely meaning they cannot be used), then the area should be rubbed with fresh blood or a needle should be inserted into the spots until blood flows; and then they should be left alone, for those that feel any blood will stop soon. 
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to fall off, sprinkle a little ground aloe, or salt, or ashes over them, and they will fall off soon.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Here is the translation of the given line:
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine; it is the restoration of fractures and accidents involving dislocations in the bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	O, son, know that those who boast about this chapter are foolish doctors and the common ones and those who never paid attention to the books of the Ancients nor read a letter from them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason it is made that this method of the learned in our land is kept secret; and I have not forgotten it at any time whatsoever; and I did not apply what follows without a lengthy reading of the books of the Ancients and study to understand them, from which I extracted the knowledge of those.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And then direct yourself to experimentation and study throughout the length of your life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have described in this chapter all that my knowledge contains and on which my experience has passed; since I have summarized this for you others and freed it from further extension; and summarized this at the end of the summary; and shown this at the end of the declaration; and formed various forms of the treatments that are administered, as is done by adding to the declaration, just as I have done in the two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summary and collections concerning fractures of bones, from which a preliminary discussion is necessary before we begin the recollection of fractured members and the various aspects of each one.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Therefore, in the prelude of this chapter, we should speak of the summaries of the discourse; and the chapters must be understood by which, at the beginning, the artisans are compelled to stand on the truth of those things; so that you and those who are quick to know or learn this noble art may do so alongside you.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And thus it is said that when you encounter a fracture or dislocation or twist or sprain, then at the beginning you must use bloodletting or splinting, or both together, unless some cause prohibits this, such as weakness of strength, or if it happened to a child, or an elderly person in decrepitude, or if it is during times of intense heat, or intense cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And then be content with food such as fresh herbs and the meat of birds and crabs; we prohibit heavy meats and overfilling oneself with foods that fill the veins with blood, except when you are certain of a developing abscess, and if you do not fear an effusion of matter into the limb.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to their original regimen with which they were accustomed.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And thus as the broken bone begins to heal, then the patient must be fed nutritious foods that are thick and heavy with viscosity, such as foods made from baked wheat with water, rice, chickpeas, lentils, cow's stomachs, eggs, fresh fish, thick wine, and similar items. With this regimen, the coagulation of the fracture occurs more easily and better.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And you should know that bones that crack in young men and the elderly cannot be naturally continued and consolidated due to the dryness of their limbs.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are consolidated and continued according to their nature all the time by the drying of those members, and thus continue and consolidate those that belong to them at the end of the softness, just as the bones of young children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	But nevertheless, nature adjusts and you bring together the broken bone from all sides with something similar to glue, in which thickness adheres and strengthens that space until they are conglutinated and bound together, until strength and firmness come to an end, just as at the beginning of fire, until no cause prevents it from performing its functions.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason it is necessary to stop the foods of the patient, foods which are heavy and viscous and large, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Describe the diversity of fractures according to the diversity of the limb.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And know that the types of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the limbs, for a fracture of the bone of the arm is different from a fracture of the bone of the head; and the fracture of the bone of the foot is different from the fracture of the bone of the thigh; and similarly all other limbs are diverse among them.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I will include a recollection of every type of fracture, explained in its own separate chapter distinct from the other.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Note the diversity of fractures within itself.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the types of bone fractures are diversified within themselves; for there is an arched fracture that occurs in the stars; and sometimes a fracture follows the length of the bone: and these are the fractures of the spine, ribs, and projecting and non-projecting additions, just as it is done when a pen is prepared to write, and there is a fracture with a plague and disruption at the head, and there is a small fissure fracture. 
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And for each type there is a specific remedy or treatment in the restoration of it, according to which will come the distinct recall of it into its proper places. 
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Mark the sign of a bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And by this is known a fracture of the bone: it is the twisting of it, and that prominence and appreciation of it to the touch, and its sound when you press it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore when there is no apparent curvature in the location and you do not feel any abnormality when you touch the bone with movement and the patient does not find great pain, then it is not a fracture.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It is possible that there may be a curvature or small fissure, in which case you do not need to press it with your hand and compression from all sides; instead, apply one of the medicines of which you recall being suitable for that moment over it; then wrap it tightly for subtle restriction.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And know that when the area is curved but not split into two or any other way that does not affect its function, and the entire part of its connection is intact, then you must begin at once to correct it by applying a poultice.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if a poultice is to be applied, then leave it on for several days until the swelling subsides; then treat it according to whichever method you can use that is gentle and clever.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And know that the restoration and healing of it [the affected area] is easier than that of a bone which sustains such an injury.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And then strengthen that which will come next, the recovery of him.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	And if there are fractures in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken limb from both ends, whether it is an arm or a leg; or with your hand if the limb is small; or with two ropes or one rope and your hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And you should position the limb according to its natural form while the broken parts are being extended; then it is necessary for you to return those additions (likely referring to displaced bones or tissues) skillfully and in whatever manner you can, to their proper places.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And take care according to your strength that you do not cause pain or injury to the patient through your operation; and strive according to your ability to align one bone with its companion in their best possible forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And it is necessary that at that moment you skillfully touch with your hand whatever needs attention, and if there is any other cause present, correct it and adjust it according to the extent of your ability.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And it is harmful to apply excessive extension and compression, just as some incompetent doctors do, who often cause inflammation due to their operation or lead to contraction in the limb, as we have seen happen frequently through their procedures.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And then proceed with equal treatment and a decent operation and constriction of that limb, and rest and tranquility; advise the patient about this and make them swear not to move that limb during their wakefulness and sleep, and prevent its rotation and agitation, and you must stop all its movements with all your strength; and await until the position of the limb is such a position in which pain is secured, which occurs when it is in the disposition of the limb's injury or lesion; then it is necessary to change that to another position in which they do not feel pain; and ensure with this that their position is straight and even so that no distortion happens to the limb when it is restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the constriction of the tranquilized limb is what I recommend; so that you know that broken limbs are diversified in their smallness and in their greatness and in the form of those. 
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And of those that are small like the arm and the toe and the finger and similar to these, then it is necessary that the wrapping be of very fine cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	And for those that are large like the thigh or the buttock, it is necessary that the wrapping be thick and strong, because the tight binding connects the large and strong member from all sides with equal pressure, in such a way that no impurity enters it.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	Then begin, for your evacuation of liquid, to apply appropriate bandaging to the site of that fracture with three or four wraps according to what the member requires; and hold your hand tightly on the bandage.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	Then come to the highest part of the fracture site, and tighten more so that your binding does not loosen with which you have tightened the area of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	Then extend the area of the fracture slightly with wrapping, and gradually loosen the binding little by little until you have restored a large part of its original shape.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	Then take another bandage and wrap it again over the broken area with wrapping, and then proceed to the part farthest from the fracture with the bandages; and let your operation in the binding and loosening of that be as we have said in the first wrapping above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then place between the layers of linen or cloth with which the curvature of the fracture is adjusted, if there is a curvature in it; and if not, do not place anything in it for any reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then place another bandage over it, and then apply these properly prepared plasters right away if there is no inflammation or cautery abscess in the area, and then place on it what sits under the abscess and reduce the swelling; leave that for several days; and then bind with plasters.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And let the plasters be made of half canna ladanum resin, well formed and wisely prepared; or they may be made of pine wood; or of palm leaves; and let the size of each plaster be according to this form and this figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, the plaster that is placed over the fracture should be somewhat thicker and more resinous than the other plasters, and the length of the plaster according to what suits the member in size and proportion; then bind over the plasters with another bandage according to your first binding; then cover it properly with pitch as we have said about binding, which is that your binding should be tighter where the fracture is closer, and the further away from the fracture, the looser the binding.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And it is necessary that the threads be medium in thickness and fineness, and they should be made of linen; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the operation of some false practitioners using their threads made from twisted ropes, it is a great error, for it disrupts the equality of the binding.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And fine threads are not suitable, because you will not achieve what you want through constriction with those, and it is not necessary that between stitch and stitch there be less than a finger.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is irritated by the extremities of the stars near the constriction in those areas, then place some felt or wool padding between them so that it does not cause injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	During some instances fracture occurs with trauma, and a disruption happens in the chain, which I will recall in that context in the second chapter under singularity.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And know that not every broken limb is set with splints on the first day; the reason being that when the limb is large, it should not be placed on the splints immediately but rather after 5 or 7 days or more, according to your certainty of the occurrence of pus formation.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the method of the plasters with which the Ancients restored fractures, dislocations, and twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Method of a plaster for the restoration of fractures, suitable for various complications and especially for women and children, as it does not produce heat or cold: take flour powder, which is the marrow of the flour that hangs from the motion of the millstone on the walls of the mill.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And prepare it thus, but strain it with egg white, and make the consistency neither too thick nor too thin; then use it accordingly.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method for a plaster to restore fractures, dislocations, and twists: take of asafetida, ladanum, acacia, hyssop, and male fern root, each one drachm x; of myrrh and aloes each one drachm v; of saffron two drachms xx. All should be crushed, strained, and mixed with either alichi water or egg white if the patient’s condition is inflamed; then use this plaster, which is well composed and easily restores broken bones, and you can prescribe it to many people.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another method for preparing a plaster that you apply to fractures and sprains: take myrrh and add white hellebore, each one dram x; of frankincense and aloe each five drams; of acacia six drams; of Armenian bole twenty drams.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All are ground in a mortar with fine powder, and they are sieved, and they are compounded with water or egg white and is administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Method of treating joints and bones separated from their places, and which cause pain in accidents, fractures, and cracks: take clean wool and submerge it in sweet wine and cooked oil, then place it over the area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	But in this plaster there is no virtue of restoration, it burns and expels the pain properly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method for a plaster that restores broken bones: take leaves of wild fig and leaves of wild poppy; mix them all together and make a plaster from them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Method for a shortened plaster administered for the restoration of bone fractures and when you want to resolve the residue of an abscess: take roots of elder, chamomile, and flowers of violets, flour of barley, all in equal parts; grind them all together and mix them with wine, if the limb is not inflamed.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	But if it is inflamed, then soothe it with coriander water or with water and oil mixed together.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method for a plaster that is more effective in resolution than the first one, when you need to treat a hard abscess and restore the limb: take roots of elder and seeds of it, hawthorn, melilot, marjoram, flowers of violets, chamomile, all in equal parts; grind them all together and mix them with sage water or sweet water or wine, according to the nature of the limb and the color condition of it.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence, line by line:
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	More in Gaul, it is seen that they place over the fractured limb substances for its restoration and causes which are dryness with little warmth such as myrrh, incense, and similar to those causes that we have recounted.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Method of plaster that you apply to injury and pain: take bread crumbs, cypress seeds, human hair or bird down, elder flowers, and salt, in equal parts; they should be crushed, sieved, and mixed together, and then made into a plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	More the quantity according to which it is necessary that the bandage remains and then be loosened, is that you consider if it is not an accidental pain or a sharp pain or the bone is broken and not displaced from its place, then you do not loosen for many days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if you encounter a place with severe pain or pressure or swelling, then you should treat or relieve that area immediately, and remove the plaster from it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take linen and sea sponge wetted with water, and submerge that in warm water, and use that to wash the area until the pressure ceases and the pain is soothed; then let the limb rest for an hour; then place upon it wool soaked in sweet wine and oil or ointment, and bind over it for a night until you are sure of a safe abscess, and that the swelling of the limb subsides, and the pain is alleviated.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then apply that subtle binding and a small plaster without making it as tight as your first constraint, and gently do so until it is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if you find that the abscess and the hardness and the pain and the swelling and all the symptoms are completely alleviated, and there is no need for a plaster or binding, then you should repeat the process as you did at the beginning equally.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if you do not encounter any of those causes in the limb that we have mentioned, then do not relieve it until three or four or five or seven days later; and sometimes all of this is left for twenty days according to how it appears to you regarding the relief of the limb, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and approaches the coagulation of the flesh over it.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And now adjust more tightly at the constriction than in your initial tightness entirely, and adjust according to the swelling of the food (stomach) of the patient, as is preceded by the recollection of it.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	And if you see the site of the fracture already dry and exhausted more than it should be, then know that nutrition is prohibited from reaching that area; therefore, wash that area with lukewarm water continuously while cleaning it; and do this for all three days; and slightly loosen the constriction, and through this operation, nutrition returns to the limb, and it heals easily.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	But what those inexperienced restorers of a fractured limb do again when it is not restored properly at the beginning, and is then restored with distortion, is an error according to their operation, causing great fear; if this were right, the Ancients would have expanded on this in their books and practiced it accordingly.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen any of them do this, which is why it is more reasonable to assume that this should not be done.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter two: On fracture when it occurs in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The types of fractures are many, and their forms are diverse, and the causes are distinct. Some fractures are caused by the impact of a club, which knocks out all the bones inside the skull, leaving only pieces of bone, just as it would split wood; therefore, this type is named ascial. Or the club incises some part of the bone, cutting through the flesh but not penetrating to the back side of it; and this type of fracture is called levatio absoluta.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the severity of these two fractures is either great or small, and of a fracture that is comminuted or impacted; and the cause of it is percussion with a stick or falling on stone, and their similarities.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture either penetrates close to the periosteum which is next to the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone, and the severity of these two types of fractures can be great or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And for a fracture that occurs in the bone, in the tiny subtlety of hair-like structures, and because of this, this type of fracture is named capillary.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And it is a fracture that is caused either by a fall or by the impact of a stone and similar objects, which causes some fragments of the bone to enter the inner parts, and it occurs in the concave area as if you were hitting the tiles of a roof when they break upon impact and their pieces go inside. 
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And this is more often done in bodies with moist bones, such as infants' heads.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And thus to all these types of fractures apply methods, which are pieces like separate stars. 
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And I will come back to all of this in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And know all these types of fractures by detection on them and by inquiry into their attempts and the presence of corrupted flesh that is upon them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And the fractured scalp is known by what is revealed over the bone, and it is cleaned, and lint is applied to it with cloth, for the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	More in the treatment of fractures, at the beginning consider the symptoms of the patient, and when you see through these symptoms that they clearly indicate fear, such as vomiting due to anger, and stretching out, and loss of understanding, and loss of voice, and fainting, and acute fever, and discharging from the bowels and burning of them, and similar symptoms in the greatest conditions, then it is likely not curable.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you hope for recovery despite unusual accidents, then you begin the treatment of him.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	Which cause is such that if the injured person comes to you at the beginning of their injury and this happens in the winter days, then you must study the setting of the bone before the fourteenth day according to all dispositions.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the days of summer, then you must take care to set the bone before the seventh day, because what is left of the bone may be corrupted by putrefaction, and accidents that we have mentioned may occur.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already progressed to the putrefactive stage covering the brain, and is in small fragmented and gritty pieces, then you must incise the fragmented and gritty parts, as I will recommend to you. 
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And you shave the head of the afflicted patient, and expose over the bone according to custom and method as much as possible according to the shape of the disease, and that it be light on the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if you happen to discover the breakage of bone, bleeding or a hot abscess, then you should oppose it with what is needed, which is to fill the area with cloths soaked in wine and oiled rags, and allow the wound to rest until the abscess is calmed and ensure there's no further bleeding; then begin around the circumference of the bone and proceed with its removal.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this should be done in one of two ways of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And one method is that you incise the bone with a straight divider, and this is its form: And then apply another divider like this one, slightly more to the side than the previous one; and this is its form:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then apply more of the dividers further to the side than the second one.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And it is necessary that you have various numbers of dividers, some of which are more to the side than others; and some of them are shorter than the others and are sharp at their ends, and they should be made of Indian or steel iron.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them with ease in percussion over the incisions so that the head does not adhere and lead it away.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is hard and strong, then you must perforate around it before administering the incisors with the non-penetrating drills, which are called non-deepening drills.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are called this only because these do not stop the process of the bone until it is near to it, so that the drill has a round extremity or edge on which its sharp head resembles an edge or small circle, which prevents it from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take a great number of these drills, each of which should be appropriate to the thickness of each bone, ensuring that you have one present for every bone in the head, with its end being sharp, and the length and breadth should be according to the thickness of this bone.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the form for three types of drills: The quality of perforating around the fractured bone is to place the drill on the bone and rotate it with your hands until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then move the drill to another location, placing it so that the distance between each hole equals the thickness of a nail or about that size.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then incise with an instrument what is between each fragment of the bone, and apply that subtle pus over it until it rises lightly, as we have said, so that you clean out the bone, either with your hand or with some other means through various tools which you will have prepared for this purpose, such as tweezers and fine forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And you must be cautious that the incising instrument does not touch any part of the spine.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And thus, after you have circumscribed the perforated bone, separate it from the spine if it is connected to it, and extract it. Then rasp and smooth that area on its roughness with an instrument similar to an incisor, but it must be more slender and finer than other incising tools.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if any small and hidden parts of the bones remain, then remove them easily with one of the tools you have; then treat the wound with lint and ointments as we have mentioned.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And another method of operation is gentle and far from fear, which we call "Gualia" and lighten it with great caution; this is what it means: at the beginning, you must start to expose the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most violent and apparent. So that when you have uncovered that part, place the tip of this smooth and gentle instrument, whose form is as follows:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And it is that the lens-shaped fracture is lion-like and does not incise any cause, and the acute fracture divides into two parts in length ahead, just as often; so that the lens-shaped fracture should be aligned with the spine with its sharp face incident on the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then strike on the incision area of one part with a small hammer so that you cut through the entire bone easily as it turns, and be sure to protect the soft tissue from any accident in any way, and even if the medicating person was the weakest of all men and the most ignorant among them; certainly, and even if they were asleep.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	When any connected cartilage attached to the pubic bone appears in certain places on the bone, cut it with the edge of a lens-shaped incisor, and remove it easily from there, for it is removed without harm and fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the subcutaneous tissue, and what is cut off or remains of the bone is its surface, and roughness and fine splinters remain within it, then you must scrape away that roughness and eradicate those splinters with sharp razors which you have prepared in various sizes so that you can apply them in the most appropriate places for their use and the most precise way according to where you need to refine your operation on that broken bone and its shape.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And you must apply with your reason at the beginning the least sharp of those razors, and then use one that is progressively sharper, and do not stop doing this continuously until you manage to administer the sharpest and the finest of all those razors.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	And in each of the other small capillary and fine fractures, you must administer care according to what you need for the correction of it.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is important to note that not everyone who has studied in that field is equally skilled or experienced.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And we have demonstrated this on large fractures as well.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the periosteum is retained when you remove the bone, then it is necessary to take cloth according to the amount of the wound, and submerge that in oiled rose oil, and place that over the opening of the wound; and then take another folded or tripled cloth and submerge it in wine and oiled rose oil and place that over the first cloth and apply this as lightly as you can on top of it so as not to press too hard on the bone; and finally apply a lint (bandage) over that, and do not compress it except according to the amount that the wound itself demands.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And leave it with this treatment for one or two days until you are sure of a safe abscess; then remove the dressing and apply medicines that have excessive drying properties, such as flaxseed and wheat flour, and powders of sage and aristolochia, and similar substances.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And you should make these medicines into a powder that is sprinkled over the wound when they are dry; generally, apply any medicine whose property is to clean without irritating.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And be careful according to your skill that the wound in your treatment is clean; and do not let there be any deafness of pus or other corruption; nor allow virulence to accumulate in it; for when it adheres to the periosteum of the skull, it corrupts that and weakens it, and you risk causing a malicious malignancy to the patient.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And when there is an injury to the skull, where the bone becomes damaged and especially when the care of it is neglected, and there is blackening on its surface; then consider if the patient suffers from the accidents we have mentioned, you should know that it is dangerous altogether.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if no blackening occurs except from the medicine that is placed upon it, and it is due to that medicine causing such blackening, then you must take one part of honey and three parts of rose oil, and with those anoint a cloth, and then place that over the wound; and then treat that with healing spices until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	For the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that the nose is not broken into more than two parts at once, usually the uppermost ones, or one of those partially visible, because in it you have two bones, for the division between them is cartilaginous, and it is not broken but may suffer from friction, twisting, and bending.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	If one of the two parts of the nose is broken, then you must insert your little finger into their nostril and align that fracture inside with your index finger, while using your thumb on the outside to guide it, until the nose returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And this should be done gently, and take care that your operation does not cause further pain to the patient.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the uppermost part of the nose, and your finger cannot reach it, then it must be aligned using the tip of a probe that has a small thickness.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then you should treat it accordingly. 
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And you should attempt the reduction of it on the first day of the fracture if possible; and if not, then around the seventh or tenth day, you should pause to let the swelling subside with cauterization.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And then insert into the end of the nose a wad of linen cloth if the fracture is in one piece, or place two splints if the fracture is in two pieces, and let the splint be thick enough to fill the space of the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And some of the ancient restorers say that the splints should be soaked in pitch and changed throughout the day, but I do not see this as necessary; instead, it is better that the wad be soaked in egg white mixed with powder of mint; then leave the splint in place until the bone is fixed and the cartilage has hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And sometimes, instead of a splint, a strip of linen cloth wrapped around an owl's feather is inserted into the nose; this is used when the nasal fracture is severe and to ensure that the patient can still breathe properly.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this method is not necessarily required; if you wish, do this, and if you wish, use splints.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if swelling occurs again, apply heat; plaster the nose with wax or fat infused with sweet wine and rose oil, or use diachylon.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	Here is the translation of the given text line by line into English:
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	If the bones of the nose are fractured or comminuted, then you must incise over them and extract the fragments with instruments suitable for that purpose; then close the wound, treat it with remedies that promote healing and consolidation, and use plasters appropriate for this.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if you encounter an ulcer inside the nose, then you must treat it with cauterization and administer lead tubes until it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter IV.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the restoration of the jaw when it is fractured.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not associated with an ulcer, observe whether the fracture is only external and has not been split into two parts nor bent inward; in this case, the treatment is straightforward.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, you should insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth; and similarly, if the fracture is on the left jaw, then insert the right index finger; and with that finger, push the soft tissue of the fracture inward easily to the outer parts, using your other hand on the outer part of the bone; in this way, you properly align it.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, then you must administer extension from both sides according to straightness until it is possible to align it.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if you encounter the dislocation of teeth to disruption, then bind those from which you hope will remain with gold or silver wire or thread; then place wax over the broken jaw, and then place a doubled cloth over it, and place a properly made bandage or a piece of linen as long as the jaw over the cloth; then bind it according to how your binding of it is prepared and apply it so that it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to use rest and tranquility, and place their food in sipped broth.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you suspect that the shape has already been altered in some way, then on the third day, you should be cautious and unbind it; then correct what has already been altered in it by applying a plaster made with ground powder, egg white, or sesame flour, after you have removed the wax from it, and place wool over the plaster.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then, when that plaster is attached and adjusted properly over it, and the position of the bone is not altered, leave it like that, do not loosen it until it is healed and the fracture has strengthened; for often this kind of fracture tightens in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if an abscess appears again, then administer what we have said multiple times during the sedation while it is being healed, and ensure that the abscess is thoroughly treated.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is accompanied by a wound, then consider whether it is a fragment of bone that has separated or splinters, then you must carefully remove those splinters with what is appropriate for that in the treatment of such injuries.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the opening of the wound is narrow, then you should enlarge it with an incision according to your necessary extent.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And then, when you have performed those treatments and nothing harmful comes out of them, then sew up the wound's opening if it is wide; and if not, apply one of the plasters suitable for this and promote healing there until it is healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On the restoration of the collarbone when it is fractured.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	Often the collarbone is broken in front of the muscle, and this fracture can occur in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	For it is either broken, separated, or divided into two parts without any complications; and its restoration is easy. Or there are complications that make its restoration difficult. Or the fracture is accompanied by a wound.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the procedure for when the fracture is accompanied by a wound is that you have two assistants present, so that one holds the support and follows the broken collarbone, and the other extends the neck to that part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And then align the fracture with your fingers in such a way that it takes the desired shape, and neither should there be any slight prominence nor concavity.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you need more extension, then it is necessary to place a roll under the patient's limb wrapped in cloth or wool, and its size should be according to your need; extend and lift the fork and compress the roll with your hand until you align the fracture as required.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot pull the end of the fork to the outer parts because it has reached the elbow, then the patient should be laid on their back, and place a cushion of moderate size on the muscle area.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the assistant should press on the muscle below so that the bone of the fork is lifted towards the elbow, and then you should correct the fracture and align it with your fingers. 
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	And if you feel thorns from the fork and they are painful, now it is necessary to cut over that area and remove those thorns with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is retained in the bone, then you should plan an incision with one of the incisors that you have prepared for this, since you have already placed the fork-like instrument used to hold the drill; and this instrument is made of wood or iron and has the following form:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it is similar to a spoon, of which this is the concavity; and its width should be according to what you need from it, according to the size or smallness of the bone.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	And let the length of it be as much as is possible for you during the operation; it should have two ends, just like a wedge, with one end being wide and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the wound that you have incised when you extracted the splinter from the bone is wide, and there is a risk of pus formation, then you should approximate the two edges of the wound with stitches.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is small, or you fear pus formation, then you should fill the wound with cloths and poultices according to the extent of the tear in the wound.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if pus formation does occur, then soak a cloth in sweet wine and rose oil and wine, and place it over the area.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	However, when the bone is swollen and its section is tight, you should apply a plaster made of ground meal with egg white, and place lion's foot over it. Then, if needed, place titillike beneath that, and then take a splint, which the Saracens call "torca," which should be long enough and about one palm wide; then place a double poultice over the lion's foot and the plaster. Next, take a thin board strip whose width is three fingers and similarly in length; then wrap that in cloth, and wrap this cloth with the board strip over the fracture area. Then apply splints as if they are wrapped around, wrapping that over the joint and below the titillike of the patient, reducing it over all parts, and when you do so, tightly bind the fracture with a tight bandage, which is something not hidden from you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And overall, the splint should not be too tight over the broken bone; and for this reason you must see the patient every day, so that when the bandage is softened or you see the splint already becoming loose, then you correct this and tighten the binding.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	Then place the patient’s pillow under their neck, and put a small cushion under the armpit of the side where they are sleeping at night; so that by doing this, the shoulder on that side is elevated, and thus the clavicle fracture is raised along with the muscle; or bind their arm to that side of the neck.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not loosen the bandage unless suppuration or an abscess occurs at the site within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	Then renew the plaster if you have seen its surface like this, and adjust it to the constriction, restore it, and leave it until the clavicle fracture is restored and coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and healed according to the method in twenty-eight days, and sometimes in some people, it happens in less time.
Capitol .vi.	Capitol .vi.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	For the restoration of a shoulder fracture.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	A spatula is broken in the side area of it, and it is not broken from it except at the edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And thus when the place is broken — and it is broken in the middle of it — and it is not known except by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture force its preparation and reduce it according to its natural figure in every way of ingenuity that is possible for you.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	Then place over the area powdered mallow mixed with egg white and lion's tar; then place a layer of folded cloth; then place over it a thin piece of wood according to the amount of the whole spoon or a little more.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	But if the piece of wood leaves a concavity in some parts of the spoon, then fill that concavity with lion's tar, and then raise the wood to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	Then strengthen over it with a long bandage applied tightly and secure the wood in place so that it does not move from its position.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And examine the bandage every day; and whenever it becomes loose, bind it again and tighten it, and adjust the wood if it has moved from its position.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And lay the patient on his side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the spatula is restored in twenty days or in twenty-five.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And thus when this number is completed, then you dissolve the joint, and you must know for certain which of the bones do not fear their beginning nor their dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed to the site of a bone splinter and place the chain there, then you cut into it, remove it, and do as we have said in the fracture of the clavicle due to an abscess. If it happens that way here.
Capitol .vii.	Capitol .vii.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	For the restoration of the fracture of the foot.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot sometimes breaks in the middle and it heals slowly; however, the ends tend to move and become misaligned and crushed.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And of the consequences when it is broken in the middle, it tends to incline towards the inner parts and causes great pain, difficulty in walking, coughing, severe fever, and vomiting blood; and it is evident in the cavity of the broken bone and is not hidden from sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of it is that the patient should be laid face down, and a cushion should be placed between their shoulders; then press on the muscles, and align the bone ends with your hands from both sides, and delicately perform the operation and adjustment in every possible way suitable for this purpose, until the bone returns to its proper shape.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	Then place a plaster and tow over it, and cover that with a thin linen or canvas bandage or something similar in lightness, as you wrap it in cloth; then carefully bind that over the broken bone so that it is not too tight; tie it according to the roundness of the back sometimes, and secure it with an appropriate tightening; then monitor the binding at all times, and when it loosens, tighten it.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if necessity provokes the removal of that due to corrosion or puncture, or pain, or an abscess that may occur in the area, then you cut and remove that, eradicate the plaster, and correct what has happened according to the method of curing him; and then return the plaster, if it needs to be applied again; and adjust the binding until he is healed.
Capitol .viii.	It seems like you've provided a chapter or section heading from an older text, specifically "Capitol .viii." which likely means Chapter VIII (Chapter Eight). Without additional context or content that follows this heading, it's not possible to provide a translation or further explanation. If you have more text from this chapter that needs translating or explaining, please feel free to share!
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	This phrase appears to be in an old Romance language similar to Medieval Latin or Old French. Here is the translation into English:
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Understand that a rib fracture does not occur except in thick parts of the back; and at the ends of them, in front, such injuries do not happen because they are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And the knowledge of it is not hidden from the senses; you should investigate it with the fingers.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration should be such that you align the fracture with your fingers in the most possible way, until it is properly aligned as needed, and then apply and secure the broken bone with a splint, if necessary.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the rib fracture is inclining towards the inner parts, then the patient experiences intense pain and puncture-like sensations, similar to those who have pleurisy, because the bone affects the membrane; and it causes difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting blood; and this condition is difficult to cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And the arteries are formed in that area with many branches.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And concerning this, it is said: one must restrict the diet of the patient that causes inflammation and flatulence, so that the stomach is not inflamed and expanded, and the fracture is not pushed outward toward the outer parts.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	And let us beware of this so that it does not lightly cause the formation of an abscess if it happens; and if it does happen, then it already helps in this.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And some of them said that a cupping glass should be placed on it and then suctioned strongly; this seems logical, but nevertheless it is feared that the cupping glass might draw excesses to the area due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And some of them said: the area should be covered with wool that has already been soaked in hot oil, and cushions should be placed between the ribs until it is filled, so that the wrapping is as when you envelop that second roundness; then the patient should be treated with a therapy for pleurisy using food and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if the pain constrains the patient strongly and cannot be endured, and the bone pierces the membrane with puncture wounds, we fear for the patient; therefore, it is necessary to incise over that area, expose the broken rib, then place an instrument over it that holds the spine in place, remembering which one to use beforehand, and cut the bone easily, and extract it.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	Then we stitch the two edges of the wound together if it is large, and treat it with plasters until it heals.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if an abscess forms inside, then you should soak pillows in oiled rags and place them over the area, and treat the patient with what is necessary for the internal abscess.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And let him lie on his side on which he sleeps until he is healed.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the restoration of fractures of the spine and the neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Sometimes fractures occur in the bones of the neck, and at other times in their articulations, and similarly in the vertebrae of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then consider, for if you find their hands already softened and stunned and deadened and cannot move them nor extend nor stretch them and when you press them with your fingers or pierce them with a needle and do not feel pain in them, now you know that they are not healed, and in the months of bad disposition it is mortal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if you press them and feel constriction with your fingers and piercing, now you know that the bone marrow is saved and that you will cure the patient with treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if this appears in the vertebrae of the neck and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then examine their feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	Now if you find them already softened, what happens to the hands will also happen here, and when he lies on his back, there is swelling and involuntary discharge, and sometimes he rolls onto his back and wants to urinate but cannot, now you know that it is mortal, and then do not labor in his treatment.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	But if none of those causes occur, the cause is better and lighter. 
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the cure for it is that you pierce the abscess to make it drain, which should be done above the affected or inflamed vertebra, or with poultices of eggs placed; place on that area several times a day until the abscess has drained.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And then apply one of the comforting and stimulating plasters, and bind it tightly with a bandage; and command the patient to rest and remain calm and not to sleep on the part where they find pain until it is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if you happen to remove the friction of the bone or any cause that has already separated from it, then you must dry out the wound and extract that bone; then approximate the two edges of the wound, stitching them if it is large; then treat it with some flesh-growing ointment until it is healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	And if the posterior end of the bone in the hip is fractured, which is the end of the femur, then you must insert the thumb of your left hand into the buttock and align the broken bone as much as possible by second-degree equilibrium; then apply a plaster and splint over it if needed, and bind it tightly.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel that there are broken shards in it, then you must operate on that area, remove them, and treat the wound with the previously mentioned treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	The line "Capitul .x." appears to be indicating the start of a new chapter or section in the medieval medical treatise. Translated into English:
De restauracio de la ancha.	For the restoration of the ankle.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the upper arm are broken, and if they break, then their fracture is not just a simple communication at the ends but extends longitudinally and inclines within; and the patient experiences pain in the area and puncture sensations, and the shoulder becomes numb when fractured.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over that area which is above the fracture, which is the shape of it.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is only at the extremity of it, then you align that according to how you are prepared by setting to make it resemble its natural form. 
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	And if the fracture is in the spine or declines to the parts below it, then you make the patient lie on their belly until you prepare the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And then, once you have aligned that, place a plaster over it, and then place a splint of wood or linen over that, and secure it tightly so that you do not fear any misplacement of the fracture nor movement of the splint.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And align the cavity with something that fills it until it takes a tight form according to equality, and instruct the patient to sleep on their back or on their side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	And if an inflammatory swelling occurs, then you should stop the extension and restoration of it until the swelling is reduced, and apply something to reduce it as previously described; then return to the restoration of it, and secure it as needed.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if the bones are shattered or crushed, then you treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	For the restoration of the fracture of the auxiliary [bone or limb].
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	Helpers are those who are between the hip and the top of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, then the restoration of it can be done in one of two ways, one of which is that you take a flat splint of moderate thickness according to this form:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And at the two ends, there should be ties, and then it should be suspended from an elevated place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And place the patient on a sheet; then extend their broken arm on the splint so that it reaches the tip of it in the middle where the curvature of the splint is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And then suspend over it some heavy object, or the servant should extend it to the sides of it; and then the doctor should hold the fracture with their hands together until the fracture is properly realigned.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other method is that the patient should lie on their back and suspend the arm of the collar with ties; then command two servants, one of whom holds what is above the fracture with their hands, and the other holds the part below it; each should extend to their respective side.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then you pull on the fracture with one bandage and on the other side with another bandage, and each of the two assistants pulls from their respective sides.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And thus if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, then it must be that half of the ligament is placed on the tendon and the other left over the fracture itself.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And similarly, if the fracture is near the knee, then it must be that the ligament is placed over that area and over the knee.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Apply that with ease and proper work, and then when it is aligned as needed and applied correctly, strengthen that area unless an abscess forms, in which case cauterize it.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	But if an abscess forms, then leave the bandage on for up to seven days, and place over it wool soaked in vinegar and rose oil until the abscess bursts, and then strengthen that area.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the method to strengthen that area is to place a plaster over the fracture, then put a wrapping of clean cloth over the plaster; then adjust the arm with the help of a support, and place your open hand over the muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And wrap the cloth and strengthen the arm with the support so that the arm is in a stable position, unless any cause from the broken bone prohibits this.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And now use plasters.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And it is that you place over the fracture a splint that is more sideways and stronger than the other splints; and place between each splint the width of a finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the break with an addition of three fingers on all sides.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	Then strengthen over the splints with the binding that I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And it is that your binding over the site of the fracture should be tighter.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the fracture has been lengthened, the binding should be looser.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And thus change the position of the splints and the binding as we have said at the time when you restore the member to its proper position, then you do so.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear an abscess may form, then loosen the binding and the splints until the seventh day as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	Then examine the limb in all parts for three days so that no pus or inflammation may occur at the site; it is forbidden for food to reach the member due to the excess of binding; therefore, correct all of this as we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	But if you are confident that there is no cause for this, then do not remove the bandage until three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the patient's sleep be on their back, and their hands should be on their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place over the splint a pad full of wool evenly, and ensure at all times, whether night or day, that the shape of the broken limb is not loosened or dissolved, or that the binding becomes loose; therefore, correct this entirely with your skill.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And give food to the patient according to the order we mentioned before, such that the food is light at the beginning while strength is being built; and then it is necessary to make the food more substantial for them.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	For it is customary that the splint and the bandage are kept tight for forty days; and then they must be loosened, and a bath should be administered and treated with ointments that correct that condition.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is rough and grinding, then you should not loosen the binding and the splints until forty days or even two months.
Capitol .xii.	Capitol .xii.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	For the restoration of a fractured arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And often the larger bone is broken alone, or the smaller one, and often they are both broken together.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the smaller bone above is broken, then the restoration of it is easy, and the healing of it is even easier.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the bone is broken below, then the fracture is bad, and the healing of it is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And worse than that is when two bones are broken together.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the broken bone is the smaller bone above, then it is appropriate for the doctor to restore it with slight extension easily until it is aligned.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the larger bone is the one that is broken, then it is necessary to apply more forceful extension.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both bones are broken together, then you must apply even stronger traction.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And you must place the hand in a position suitable for the restoration and extension of it, stretched out on a cushion, with the wrist of the hand at the upper parts more so than all the other fingers, and the little finger should be lower than the others, and the patient should lie on a lowered chair.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And let there be a cushion in front of him at his height or upright position, so that the patient does not move around.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	Then the minister extends the arm of the patient with his hand or with a bandage, and another minister extends it similarly.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	Then the doctor aligns the bone as he returns it to its best possible position.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if there is any doubt about the fracture, then you must carefully reduce every piece to its proper place with your skill.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if it appears that there is a separate doubt about the chain (possibly referring to a series of joints or bones) and there is no hope for the restoration of it, then you should operate on it and remove that part according to the method we have described above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	But if the fracture is caused by a plague, I have already made a separate chapter on this topic, so refer to that chapter for the treatment.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you should line a cloth with a cerot made from rubbed oil and white wax, which should be of moderate consistency between thick and thin, and place a strong cloth over it with gentle pressure until the abscess is drained; then remove the cerot and apply a plaster prepared with ground meal and egg white, and then apply bandages; and let the bandage that is placed over this fracture be wider and stronger.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And you should know that the number of bones in the arm is seen in major dispositions, or rather a fracture in one piece or in two pieces together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And then apply your bandage firmly and vigorously over the site of the fracture, and when the bandage extends above the fracture or below it, make the binding somewhat looser according to how the memory of it is recalled at the beginning of the chapter. 
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moist, and not hard nor rough, and the thread with which it is sewn should be of a proper thickness between fine and thick, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the limb and the joint for some days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if any cause occurs for which correction is necessary, such as when a swelling appears on the limb, then you must soak the limb in warm water until that swelling subsides.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And leave the limb unstrained until it rests, and then apply the binding again.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the binding is already softened and the bone is reset and resembles its original state, then correct everything with your skill.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider if the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the limb due to excessive binding, for then you must soften it slightly and leave it that way for several days until the nourishment can flow to it, and then strengthen it again.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	But if the patient does not suffer from any of those conditions we have mentioned, then it is not necessary to loosen it until about twenty days or thereabouts.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And then let the patient's limb be suspended and allowed to move gently, and make the patient sleep on their back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or in thirty-two days, or often it is restored in twenty-eight days, and all of this depends on the condition of the compounds and the state of the healing power.
Capitol .xiii.	Capitol .xiii.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	For the restoration of a fracture in the thumb and fingers.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Know that the thumb of the hand and the joints of the fingers are often fractured, and do not collide with them except for slight, scattered impacts.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when the hand is fractured or slightly injured, then the patient must keep it hanging and in front of him place a splint according to equality, and then place his hand on that which is extended.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	Then the minister should extend the broken bones, and the doctor should align those that need to be joined with proper alignment.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And then it is necessary to apply a plaster and lint, unless there is inflammation, in which case use a cautery; then place a splint on top according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped that in linen cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	But if the fracture is in the parts inside the palm of the hand, then make something resembling a ball of cloth, and instruct the patient to hold that with their fractured palm; then bind it with long cloth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And let the star-shaped cloth be placed under him in such a way that the body is applied to the palm; and hold it tightly as needed.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	If the fracture is on the parts outside, then it is necessary to place a splint on top and another splint under the fractured part, holding it in the palm so that the hand may be open and straight; then apply the binding, just as the hand is turned towards the wrist between the fingers with bandages.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if a fracture occurs in one of the bones of the fingers, then if it is a finger that needs alignment, align it as necessary and then straighten it with the palm; if you wish, place a small straight splint on it so that the fracture is elevated and not pressed down.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	But if the fracture is in the other fingers, such as in the middle finger, or the index finger, or the ring finger, or the little finger, then it should be aligned and bound with the adjacent finger; or all of them can be bound together continuously, which is better; or place a small splint on it, just as we have said for the thumb.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your treatment, and also in that of the patient, the disposition of hot abscesses and their opposites—through your operation—with what is necessary when any cause of these occurs, according to the repeated narration thereof.
Capitol .xiv.	Capitol .xiv.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	For the restoration of a fracture of the thigh bone.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bone of the thigh is broken and it is declared by sensation according to how it turns to the front part and to the highest pus.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration of him is done thus: the bandage is tightened over the fracture and another bandage is placed under the fracture, and the patient is laid face down on their stomach.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And then the minister extends the entire limb to its original position according to its nature, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone. 
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	If the binding is applied to the root of the thigh, then the bandage should be tied tightly at the end near the pubic area, so that the extension lies in place, and the other bandage leaves the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And similarly, if the fracture is close to the joint, then the bandaging should be done near the joint, and the extension should be made towards the parts below it.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	Then the doctor aligns the bone with both hands before reducing it according to its natural form, and the bone is joined by a good union; at this point, it is necessary to apply a plaster and binding, unless the member swells.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	But if it swells (apostema), then you should leave it for several days until the swelling subsides, and then return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The binding should be done as follows: you must wrap a hard bandage over the fracture, fold it two or three times, and remove any excess; then wrap the leg until you reach the ankle and the base of the thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert long cloth between the thigh and the leg near the joint towards the lower parts, ensuring that the ends of the cloth come from the higher part of the two sections; then wrap around the leg and thigh any excess from the bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And then place over the thigh in the location of that fracture some splints, and place one splint on the bone of the chest.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill the spaces between the chest and the thighs with soft cloths, so that the constriction is alleviated.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then begin with strong binding at the center over the site of the fracture using three or four layers, and as you move away from the area of the fracture, make your binding less tight, lighter, and softer.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And then extend the two ends of the bandage to the parts between until you reach the ankle of the foot, and tighten both ends of the bandage on the other side so that the binding does not come out of its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then apply the binding in such a way that it does not cause any corrosion, abscess, swelling, or similar conditions to the limb; and if any of these issues occur, you should loosen the binding, and correct whatever happened as soon as possible, according to what we have said many times.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a piece of bone that protrudes in the fracture, then you should align it as much as possible; and if not, place something over it to remove it, and treat it with whatever promotes healing until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And sometimes this thigh fracture is treated by setting it with splints, just as we have said in the aid and in the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	However, in the restoration of him in such a manner made, do not cause the patient lameness; and if it is restored alone, other than applying the other side, then it is necessary that he limps who is always [affected by this condition].
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And you should know that the thigh is strong in forty days or a little more or a little less, and all of this depends on the diversity of the constitutions and other conditions.
Capitol .xv.	Capitol .xv.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	For the restoration of the fracture of the kneecap bone.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Know that a fracture of the kneecap can happen rarely, but it often occurs in multiple places with atrophy.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	And if you encounter a fracture, then it is not just a crack or dislocation in its parts, and this can be one wound or several wounds, and over all of this has been stated with the feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of it is such that what is broken in its parts should be aligned by those inside so that they are added and joined as much as possible through equalization, facilitation, and construction.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And then apply a plaster and place it on that round spot, if you need to do so; and bind it tightly with an appropriate bandage.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And then consider all the treatments that we have recommended in other fractures, such as applying a cautery to an abscess and similar procedures to address any complication with what is appropriate until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On the restoration of a fracture in the thigh.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Know that in the thigh there are two bones, one of which is thick and is named for the thigh itself; the other is slender and is called the fibula.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And it happens in some types of fractures that both bones of the thigh are affected, and thus the restoration is done similarly to the restoration of an arm fracture, and the operation for it is the same.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if both bones are broken together, the thigh is displaced in all directions.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the bone is fractured more subtly, the chest is turned towards the parts in front. 
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the largest bone is broken, you will find that among these causes; it is one of those causes that are not within your control.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And then apply extension, equalization, and ligature of the splints according to that alignment.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, if the fracture of the thigh is slight with small fragments, the extension should be less and lighter, and relieve it with your strength.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And there is some reason for surgery on the thigh, which is when you align the splints and complete your entire procedure. At that time, you will take pieces of pine wood, which are placed under the causes that are placed on supports, and are made somewhat like palm branches; choose those with a small thickness, not too thick, and the length of those should be according to the length of the thigh, and from the knee to the end below.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	Then wrap each piece of cloth in two layers according to its length, and place one on the affected part of the thigh from one side and the other from the other side, and they should extend from the knee down to the lower part of the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	Then bind the two splints in three places at both ends and at the middle, because with this structure, the thigh is prevented from tilting to the right or left side, and remains in proper position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And already a piece of wood according to the length of the chest has been administered; and it is placed on the patient's chest to prevent any movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And it is especially important that you do this in a fracture, and when it is properly treated as such. 
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then consider each day the patient's chest and study it with previous knowledge, and you guard against abscesses and inflammation or other similar causes; and when any of those causes occur, then apply what is necessary until he is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	It seems like you've provided a chapter or section marker, "Capitul .xvii.", which translates to "Chapter XVII." in English. This indicates the start of the seventeenth chapter in a text. If you have more content from this chapter that needs translation or interpretation, feel free to provide it!
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	This text appears to be in an old form of Romance language similar to medieval Latin or Old French. The sentence translates to English as follows:
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	At the ankle, not all fractures occur; but fractures do occur in some of the foot bones occasionally; and in the toes of the foot rarely does fracture happen, and it doesn't affect them unless there is friction in the joints that are prone to such issues.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the foot are fractured and require those bones to be elevated above each other within them, then the patient should place their foot on the prepared ground in such a way as described.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	And then place a hand on what is elevated from those bones, and then press those [bones], and push them back into their places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And then apply a plaster and bandage on top of it, and place a small board with two rounded ends under the foot.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And then strengthen that area with the foot using a proper structure, since you have wrapped it with cloths and other materials as needed.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And after three or four days have passed, then you should untie the bandage, for you will find the bones pushed back into place, whether they are fractured or dislocated, and the operation on those [bones] is thus known to you.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if some fingers are fractured, then restore them and realign them as I have taught you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And then place a splint on the fractured finger according to the length of the finger, and position it slightly to one side; then place this board under the foot as I have instructed you, and secure that area with a proper binding.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	And if what is cut from the bones are two or three or more pieces, then you place a strip of its quantity wrapped in lion cloth on each finger, and tighten the table at the lowest part of the foot, standing with one end of the table, pierce the sole of the foot so that it has good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is important for you not to forget that you should not consider all the causes which have been mentioned to you in other fractures and accidents we have discussed; and prepare yourself for any accident with what is needed.
Capitol .xviii.	Capitol .xviii.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of the fracture of the pubic bone of the woman and of the bone of the penis and the penis itself of the man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the pubic bone of the woman is fractured, then let her sit in a slanted position, and then incline her slightly towards one side, and keep her held from behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And then the midwife fills the pubic area with padding, and it is done in such a way that it supports the area; and then the woman should be shaken gently, and her back should be raised little by little, for all of this is intended to ensure that the fractured bone returns to its proper position. 
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And then place pillows under his back, and when he needs to urinate, the catheter comes out easily and he can urinate; then return it according to the method by which you inserted it at first, and subsequently put him back on his original pillow.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do this for seven days or around that time, for it restores health.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you want, take a sheep's bladder and attach a cane tube to the wound; insert the entire bladder into the rectum, then blow into the tube with force until the bladder is inflated inside the rectum, for the fracture will be reduced.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And then it should be filled with a catheter and left in place for several days as we have recommended, until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bone of the pelvis of a man or woman is broken, then administer in its restoration and fixation what we have recommended for the hip bone.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And what is right is not hidden in these rare and nearby fractures, especially for one who has some study and use and understands my book well; for this fracture signifies to you the greatest disposition toward a correct method in its restoration and fixation, and thus understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	And in the case of a man’s penis when it is frostbitten, take goose grease and place the penis into it; then cover it with a cloth wrapping, keep it wrapped up, and leave it like that for three days or so, and it will be healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX. 
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	For the restoration of bone fractures when it is by injury.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for those to whom a fracture accompanied by inflammation occurs, and especially if the bone is large such as the thigh bone or the shinbone, or similar to those, that you apply care and perform trepanation on it immediately if the conditions for trepanation are favorable to you or testify as we have said above.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the inflammation causes bleeding, then you must take care to stop it by sprinkling finely ground powder over it, if there is no other reason preventing you from doing so.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	Then begin to restore the fracture on the very next day, and do not delay this, unless an abscess occurs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	But if an abscess occurs, then you should delay the restoration until the ninth day, until the abscess has subsided, and do not approach it on the third and fourth days, because you may cause bad accidents.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	But if the broken bone protrudes above the skin surface, then you must carefully reduce and align it using your hands with ease and minimal extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	And if the extension is not prepared by you and the reduction of it with your hands, then you should reduce that with your hands using this instrument; and the instrument which is made of iron has a length of seven or eight digits and its width depends on the amount of the injury; and therefore, it is necessary for the doctor to take three or four of these according to what is needed in the treatment for all kinds of fractures.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And it should be round and slightly thin at the tip so that it does not bend when you apply pressure on it during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And it should have a sharp end with its edges at the extremities; and the upper part of it should be mostly thick, and from the middle to the ends should be thinner.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is its form:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is named in Greek "labre volentz atelarem", which means a small spatula.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	It is necessary that the end of it be placed elevated above the prominent part of the bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And push that area in once so that the bone returns, and it should be aligned with some adjustment. 
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And therefore strive to align the ends of the fracture between them, and if the broken end is delicate, and does not take that instrument well for a good exception, then you must incise the end of that bone so that the instrument can have power over it.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	And if you cannot reduce the bone completely as we have recommended, then incise it with one of the incisors that we have mentioned; or saw through it with one of the saws in whatever manner is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	Then smooth out what remains rough and fragmented on the bone.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced, and after the reduction, the patient experiences severe pain, then you should know that the bone has not been returned to its natural position; and then do whatever provides great relief to the patient.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your restoration of the bone is complete, then soak a cloth in styptic black wine, and especially if it is summer, do not place cerot or any other substance containing oil on the wound, so that it does not cause putrefaction and corruption.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then administer poultices at the time of the peak effectiveness of the bone restoration process, and leave the wound uncovered in such a way that you can cut away the scab with scissors and use dressings according to the extent of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And be cautious to not confuse the wound with the fracture, for many times foolish doctors have done this, causing their patients to suffer death or a debilitating illness or severe harm, which is pus.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if your fracture is light, soft, different from the other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the wound is large or it is a bad wound, and you fear the various accidents we have mentioned, and you find pain in the area, then do not place poultices on it. Instead, use a dressing of hard cloths instead of poultices and bind it tightly with those.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And after one or two days when the wound begins to generate pus, then you should remove the cloth that you had placed over it, and then apply plasters, ointments with which we customarily treat wounds, such as tetrapharmacum ointment and similar ones.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And it is necessary for you to loosen the bandage and examine the wound each morning and evening until it is consolidated and fixed, and it must be that the limb is prepared in such a way that pus runs from it to other parts easily.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If many days have passed since the wound occurred, and it has not healed nor separated from the limb, then you know that there are pus pockets forming within the wound which need to be probed with a probe. 
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those swellings that are separated, remove and extract them; those that cannot be separated and cause the limb to become painful, you should incise them according to what is possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if you encounter the plague, syphilis, or other forms of corruption and putrefaction, then it is necessary to apply one of those methods suitable for it, as was previously described in its respective chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And on this point where my speech must focus and you should pay attention: when a large bone is broken, you should treat the limb as you would the thigh or shoulder bones and similar ones to those of larger limbs, and do not attempt traction or extraction, which often lead to death; leave that inside so it can rot, for in about twenty or thirty days, it will fall out on its own; then tend to the wound if visible, and if not, leave it be.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	On the treatment of nodulation that occurs at the site of some fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Motives seen occur this swelling in the aftermath of fracture healing, and more so near the joints, which disfigures the shape of the limb; and you strongly prohibit the limb from its natural movement.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider if the swelling is recent and administer those medicines that have astringent properties such as alum, ashes, myrtle, cicuta, acrisia, and similar ones; take some or all of these, compound them with astringent wine, or egg white, or sweet wine, apply that on the swelling with tow, and bind it tightly over it with good compression.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And leave the compression on for several days without loosening it; then remove it and repeat another round until the swelling is reduced; or apply a sheet of lead lightly over that area, for lead has the property to reduce all that is inflamed in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if the swelling has already turned into a hard mass and is constricted, and it is necessary to carefully remove it, then cut through the part that is most prominent, and excise the excess and protruding parts, or reduce it with appropriate binders until it is reduced; care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	On the restoration of a fracture when it is set, and then the limb remains delicate and does not heal according to its natural course.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is restored, and the limb remains thin and weak, this does not happen except for several reasons: one of which is an excess of solution in the ligament and improper binding; or due to excessive tightening of the ligaments preventing nourishment from reaching the limb; or by unnecessary application of too many ointments; or by excessive movement at inappropriate times; or by lack of blood in the patient's body and their overall weakness.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the treatment for this is to feed the patient and make their heart tender so that blood may multiply in them; administer baths; and bring joy and happiness to them.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	Then place a plaster on the limb so that the plaster draws more nourishment to it, or continue to apply warm water treatments until the nourishment flows and returns to its natural state.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	On the treatment of broken bones when they are restored crookedly and you prohibit the proper operation for their correction.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When you encounter a limb that has already been restored near the healing of its curvature and prominence at the broken bone and knotting, which is due to the alteration in shape of the limb, yet the limb is not prevented from its natural function, therefore, there is no need for you to heed the words of those who believe that limb is newly broken.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	And indeed, there are foolish doctors and restorers who have done this in our land; and this operation is highly condemnable, leading to great fear, the sign of which is fatal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	But if the limp and knotting are recent, then they should be treated with tepid water in which softening herbs have been boiled, such as leaves of elder and roots thereof, and melilot, and similar ones; and it is to be made into a poultice with a softening plaster like well-made dyallaquilon; or the mucilage of the root of elder should be taken and mixed with ground linden flower or oil of cerami, and applied as a poultice with that; or fat figs should be taken and crushed with pigeon droppings, and similar medicines named for strengthening consolidation.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And sometimes it is dissolved with constant light friction using moist hands, and the limb should be moved in all directions at all times.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
Capitol .xxiii.	The text appears to be in an early Romance language that shares features with Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. The given line is:
De sermo en dislocacio.	From the text provided and its translation style, it seems that the language is a mix of medieval Latin and Romance languages. Based on this context, here's an attempt at translating the given sentence:
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when you encounter a dislocation, it is necessary to immediately attempt to reduce it, and do not delay the reduction, for if it is delayed, the area becomes inflamed and makes the joint stiff, thus complicating the reduction of the dislocation.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for this reason, it should not be massaged or stretched during the time of inflammation, because doing so often brings about spasms and pain.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	However, when this happens, you must prepare to perform a flapotomy on the patient, and then wait until the inflammation subsides; afterwards, the limb should be anointed with warm water and oil, and then it can be reduced with ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And every limb should be treated in such a way that the memory of its proper place returns to it. 
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And I have already ordered the chapters on dislocation as they precede in fractures; from the part of the body most superior to the part most inferior.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Capitol .xxiiii.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	For the translation of the given medieval medical text line:
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	So dislocated the two jaws do not hurt; and the dislocation of both is done according to one of two ways: that either they are displaced from their places by slight movement, and so softened a little; or they are dislocated by complete dislocation and entirely, between which they are softened at the joint where saliva flows out from the patient and cannot hold it nor can close his mouth, and the tongue of him is wrapped in his words.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	When the dislocation is slight, it often returns to its proper position with little cause in most cases.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	But if the dislocation is complete and total, then it must be gently reduced without any delay.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And it is such that the minister holds the patient's head, and the doctor inserts the index finger of one hand into the area of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth of the patient if the dislocation is on one side; or he inserts both index fingers together if the dislocation is on both sides, with the other fingers of the hand being outside to balance; and commands the patient to relax their jaws and allow them to move from each side; and the doctor balances the jaw and pushes the jaw until it returns to its proper place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated, then administer evaporation with hot water and oil until the reduction of both is gently made, and do not delay the reduction of both at all, as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And then when they are returned to their place and balanced, and the patient's mouth is closed and not softened, then place over them cloths with cerot, which is made of wax and oil mixed together; and then bind it gently with soft bandages.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient lie on their back, and his head should be resting between two pillows, so that he does not turn to either the right or left side; and do not force him to chew any food; rather, before his usual mealtime, give him lion's flesh, provided that when the pains have ceased and his jaws are unhinged, then let him eat what he wishes.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And this should be administered with ease, and he should not work near the area of the mouth; let him eat and drink and rest, until his jaw is unhinged and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if it is difficult to reduce two dislocated jaws when they are out of place and do not return to their proper positions, then frequently fevers may occur and there might be constant sweating, and the patient's stomach will be severely upset, and severe vomiting of pure bile may also happen.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see this, then know that it is a bad sign; and often the one to whom this happens will die within ten days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	Of the reduction of the dislocation of the collarbone and of the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The collarbone is not dislocated inward due to its continuation with the ribs; and sometimes it is dislocated outward, and this is apparent to the sense.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	Then compress the area with your palm using strong compression, for it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	Then place an ointment and a poultice on that area and apply pressure to it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	However, the extremity of that which is connected to the elbow and continues with it, does not get dislocated at all; therefore, it must be reduced and aligned as we have said and according to what you are equipped to do.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	Then place an ointment and a poultice on that area, apply bandaging, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until they are healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And with this method of treatment, the extremity of the muscle is returned to its proper place when it has been separated from its location.
Capitol .xxvi.	It seems like you've provided a chapter or section heading, "Capitul .xxvi." which translates to "Chapter .XXVI." in English. This likely marks the beginning of the twenty-sixth chapter in a text. If you have any specific content from this chapter that needs translation or explanation, feel free to share it!
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	This phrase translates to:
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, one of which is when it is dislocated at the joint near its attachment.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it is dislocated above the muscle, and this is done slowly; and it is not dislocated behind by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated in front by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And more significantly, it is dislocated and comes out of the joints where there are fewer tendons, and particularly in those areas where there is less flesh, it dislocates easily; but in those areas where there is more flesh, it comes out with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And it often happens to some people that they suffer a blow or fall, and the muscle swells with a hot abscess, and it is damaged by this having been dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then it is necessary that you apply something under and around the affected area, and then proceed with the treatment of it.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And the dislocation is known when it occurs in the areas where there are fewer tendons; so that you can distinguish between a dislocated muscle and a healthy one, as you will find clear differences between them; and you will notice at the head of the dislocated muscle a concavity and fewer tendons, such that the touch of the head of the muscle feels like an egg, and the patient cannot bring their hand to their ear or move it in any way.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If the toes or their joints are dislocated, you will immediately feel it clearly, and it is not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And of this dislocation, easy reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction is that the practitioner raises the patient's arm to the parts above; and then places their own thumbs under the joint; and lifts the joint forcefully back into its place, and the practitioner raises the patient's limb, extending it upwards; and then holds it so that it returns gently.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	And if it does not return as we have said, and remains in the state where the dislocation occurred for many days, then the patient should be bathed in warm water and given a drink that softens and relaxes, just as if it were cooked with radish seeds, fenugreek, and mint in water, which should be administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And then the patient should be laid on their back and their joint should be supported by a pad of wool that is neither too light nor too tight. Then the doctor places their foot on the sphere, lifts the head of the muscle with strength, and pulls the patient's limb so it does not remain distorted at the joints below, while another practitioner holds the patient’s head to prevent any distortion at the upper joints, for this will quickly return it to its proper place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, reduce that according to this method: and it is that you make present a man who is taller than the patient, and he stands on the side of that limb, and interposes his thigh under the protrusion of the patient, lifting the protrusion up so that the patient is suspended in the air, and another minister pulls the leg of the patient from below his abdomen.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	And if the patient is light, then it is necessary to suspend him using another cause, so as to make heavy that which has become displaced, for the dislocation returns quickly.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced in another way: and it is that a long pole is fixed into the ground, the top of which is rounded like the head of a mortar, neither too thick nor too thin, and then it is placed under the patient; once placed over the top of the pole with lion's skin cloth, the patient stands along the length of the pole, and then their arm is extended towards one side, while their body is stretched out on the other side with strength, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if it is difficult to reduce it for all the reasons we have mentioned, then use this treatment: which is that you take a stick whose length should be two cubits, and its width should be four fingers, and its thickness should be light at the tip according to this form:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And then place a round cloth or linen on the head so that the splinter does not hurt the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And then the patient's body should be laid down, and their hand or arm should be extended over the stick between the parts of the limbs, and the stick should be tied to the helper and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	And place the arm on a step of a ladder according to latitude, and the hand should be extended towards the parts below it, and the other side should be suspended from the other end, for the joint will soon come into place.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the insertion of the instrument is completed in whatever way possible for you, and then it is necessary to place a fine woolen thread of equal quantity; and then apply a poultice prepared with ground meal mixed with honey and egg white over all the muscle, so that it covers above, and then secure the thread tightly with a proper binding; and the bandage should be wrapped around the poultice, and the hand of the patient should be attached to his neck, and left as such, and the hand of the patient should not be moved for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And it is necessary to reduce the food of the patient slightly, until the limb is strengthened, for it is easier on the healing of him.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And then the food should be increased somewhat after seven or five days, and exercise should be performed; and if it is stabilized and not softened, then it is healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	But if the joint is dislocated frequently due to moisture that affects it or for other reasons, then it is necessary to apply a cautery with three marks, as was previously stated in the chapter on cauterization.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this is done and after seven days the bandage is removed and the joint is not stabilized, and the plaster and compression are reapplied several times but it does not stabilize and hangs down, and he cannot lift that arm to the parts above, then you know that his nerves, which are at the head of the muscle, have already been cut or stretched or softened, and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	Regarding the dislocation that occurs between the foot and the ankle or the parts behind it, the reduction is done with thrust and extension using the hands until it returns to its proper position.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And another compression should be applied there, and care for it until it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if during the healing process you notice heaviness in the limb and delay in its movement, then the patient should use baths multiple times until that heaviness is alleviated and it returns to its original nature.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the treatment of dislocation of the knee.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	Know that the joint of the knee is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated in all directions, mostly forward or backward, and the dislocation is not hidden from you when you see or touch it according to whatever figure it is dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated knee with your hand, this becomes clearly evident to you, for the joint is concaved and cannot bend the leg, nor can it touch its own muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And it is necessary to cool it and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before an inflammatory swelling occurs, for if the inflammatory swelling does occur, the reduction becomes difficult, and even then it may not be fully healed; especially when it is in the rear parts, for it is worse than all other types of dislocations, causing more pain, and often leads to death with it.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of it, when it is one that can be reduced, is to extend the limb with two hands, and expand the arm, placing the doctor's hands on the knee and below it, and to push the joint with the tips of his fingers together, or with the edge of his palm until it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	But if the dislocation is in the front part, then return it by bending the arm with your hand, until you hit the elbow with the edge of your palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not respond to reduction, then administer strong extension and forceful movement.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And it is such that two assistants should extend the arm, and those two assistants should hold it firmly so that the extension is not reduced.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	Then the arm should be rotated in all directions, since it is wrapped with a long folded cloth over his hand or joint.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, anoint it with some oil so that those factors which help in the lubrication of the joint are facilitated; then forcefully push the joint until it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	Then for the reduction of a dislocated shoulder, it should be placed on a padded support where it is treated with constrictive and binding with egg white, and it should be pulled with gradual traction, and the arm should be suspended from the neck, and left like this for several days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then it is loosened; and if the joint has been formed in its proper place, then you loosen the binding around it and leave it that way.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see that the joint is not strong enough, then you reapply the plaster and the binding, and leave it like that for several days until it becomes sturdy; and then loosen it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	But if you encounter serious complications during the reduction of the joint, and its position is unstable, then apply moist treatment with baths and gentle friction, and compression until it is relieved; or place something immobile over the joint to prevent movement, as this is a matter of fatty tissue displacement; then bind it and leave it that way on the bone day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then remove that, and place it in a bath; when it floats, then gently rub the joint with mild friction, and then reapply something immobile over it, as this is a case of displaced tissue, once, and the second time, and the third time.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	with the application of baths until it is healed.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you want, place over that damp and scraped cow's split with butter and press on it; and do this several times, for it is moist and return it to its condition.
Capitol .xxviii.	Capitol .xxviii.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	For the treatment of dislocation of joints, specifically of the joint that is between the arm and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	When the hand is dislocated sometimes it can be easily reduced, and the reduction of its dislocation is light, but the opposite is true for other joints; however, it must be done quickly in reducing it at the moment when it becomes dislocated, before the area becomes inflamed or an inflammation occurs.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of its dislocation is that you place the joint of the patient's hand on a table and the assistant extends that hand, and the doctor places their hand or palm on the prominence of the joint, and pushes it until it returns to its proper place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, it must be considered that if the palm is already dislocated towards the back of the hand, then the patient should place the back of their hand on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is toward the back of the hand, then the position of the hand should be naturally on the table so that the doctor's hand can press on that prominence of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And if it returns immediately, that is good; and if not, then strengthen that area with a soft bandage to prevent inflammation and leave it like that; do not repeat this process, because otherwise, the pus will accumulate and you will not be able to reduce it within a few days.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	But however the joint remains in its tortuous state; and if you do not find any cause in the patient, except that the hand is softened and cannot hold onto anything firm; then know that the nerves are broken or crushed, and now there should be no hesitation but to strengthen it with a cautery near the wound site and thus confer some relief.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	When the hand has returned to health, then place over it the poultice we have recommended, and let it be kept and strengthened for five days; then remove it and let it rest while exercising the hand.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	But if the movement of it is hindered and some heaviness occurs in it, then alleviate that with warm water and by applying friction several times until it is relieved.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	On the treatment of dislocation of the fingers.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Sometimes the fingers can be dislocated in any direction.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when any of those fingers is dislocated on the back or the palm side, then hold the finger and push the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns to its place.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And then support the head of the finger, and suspend that part which is dislocated, and leave it like this for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then suspend it and extend it until it is properly straightened on that same day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when it is not yet straight, bind it according to that method, and do not stop unbinding it during the day and exercising with movement, and bind it at night; and do this for several days until it is straight.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And do the same if it is dislocated at the wrist, bind it in that area and perform this as your first procedure until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And similarly do the same when it is dislocated in other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	On the treatment of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When a complete dislocation occurs in any of the vertebrae of the back or neck, and multiple vertebrae are displaced from their positions, then it cannot be cured, for death is expected in the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And the sign of this is that the excretion of the patient happens without their will, and they cannot hold it in; and many times some parts of their body are softened or both sides of their chest or both arms are affected, or one of those; or a vertebra is displaced from its place, for often it is dislocated and often the displacement affects all four limbs.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	And when it is dislocated at the rear parts, it is called sciatica.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	However, the treatment of it is that you should consider if the sciatica occurs from infancy, because in that case, there is no cure and no complete recovery from it.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	However, in cases where sciatica occurs due to trauma or impact or similar causes, the Ancients have extensively described the methods of treatment with lengthy explanations, most of which prove beneficial; but I have shortened that discussion, excusing its brevity from excess, by my proximity to my own understanding and explanation, with which I have outlined and formed this from a different approach than that used to demonstrate and elaborate on it.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And it says that in gout which affects the front part of the feet, there is neither generation nor cure for it; and similarly in that which affects both sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And of those, it is only cured when it affects the back properly with what I recommend.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And it is that the patient should be laid face down on a smooth surface near the wall, and have a moist plaster placed under them so that their feet are not injured.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	Then a straight pole should be placed, fixed in the ground at the end of the bed near their head, and another pole across their feet at the other end of the bed.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And the attendant should hold one pole, and it should not be fixed in a hole; another attendant should hold the other pole in the same manner.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Then wrap around the head of the patient and place a linen band firmly under them; extend the end of the band to the pole that is near their head, and tie it there; then tighten another band over their hips and thighs, extending towards their chest; then adjust all the bands and tie them to the other pole that is near their feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And then the minister should stretch the ligament at the joint of the bone, and neither the two bones nor the ligaments should remain in their original places where they were fixed, but rather they should not be fastened as we have said. 
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor places his palms on the spine with strength until it returns, or he places them on a table, and then adjusts his feet on the table until it returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	But if it does not return in this manner, then take a table whose width or length is about three cubits, and make an opening in the wall near the patient into which the end of the table can fit.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	Then place the middle of the table on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and push well so that the spine is compressed and returns to its proper place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, use a screw that is turned by hand; the patient's head should be placed on the ground with two sticks at the rear end, each stick being one cubit in length, and similarly place the patient’s head between two more sticks. The distance between each stick should be one palm, and holes should already have been made in each stick through which the screw turns, and each end of the sticks should be firmly fixed to the ground so that they do not move.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And there should be one round stick in which the screw is placed, and it should be rotated in the two holes of the two sticks.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of it there is a notch in which the stick is formed, the length of which is one palm plus what is twisted; and in the other two sticks it is similar to that.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then tighten the ligatures that you have placed on the patient’s feet at the site where his head should be, and the ligatures that you have placed on his thighs at the place where his feet should be.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then each turn should be held by a minister who turns the handle with their hand, and the doctor dresses the spine as we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the form of the turn (handle): 
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And then ensure that the vertebra is returned to its place and the area is smoothed out; at this point it is necessary to apply a drying paste with egg white, and then some cotton wool; and then place over the paste a strip of cloth whose width should be about three fingers or thereabouts, and the length of which should cover the site of the dislocation, and over the part of the vertebra.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then bind it with the bandage we have mentioned, and let the patient consume subtle nutrients until they are healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if any prominence remains in the area at the end of the healing process, then it is necessary to administer medicines that soften and dissolve over a long period with the use of the table we have recommended; and a sheet of lead is already applied to that area.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And sometimes a prominence occurs at the rear of the spinal vertebrae, and it is painful due to that dislocation; and it is that bone which protrudes, so you should not apply this medicine to it, for it could cause serious harm or even death.
Capitol .xxxi.	Capitol .xxxi.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	For the translation of the given line:
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Understand that the joint of the bone and the joint of the muscle can only result in dislocation solely, and do not apply to those things which you would apply to other joints of small movement and concavity.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the joint of the ankle is dislocated in four ways, for it can be dislocated inward, or outward, or forward, or backward.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And it is most often dislocated inward, and rarely forward or backward.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And the sign of dislocation inward is that when you align the leg of the sick person with the healthy one, it appears longer and the heel more prominent than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their foot properly due to swelling, which is the place where a hot swelling has formed, so that the head of the thigh bone has moved here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the sign of dislocation outward is that the symptoms are contrary to those [of inward dislocation].
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	And the sign of dislocation forward is that the leg extends fully, but it cannot bend at the point where the pain in the heel is; and if one attempts to walk, they cannot do so due to the pain in front; and the urine is retained, and swelling forms around it, and movement is restricted over the ankle.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And the sign of one to whom a dislocation occurs in the posterior parts is that he cannot extend his leg, nor can he bend the front part before bending the knee, and the thigh on that side appears shorter than the other, and the knee is softened, and the head of the femur has moved from its proper place.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	And the reduction of the types of this dislocation is what you consider now: if the dislocation is old and ancient, which has already become fixed with time, then you should bring it close to you and administer the reduction and leave it according to its condition; in that case, it is not a complete cure; and therefore no further action needs to be taken at that point.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	But in the case where the dislocation is recent and is one of the four types of dislocation, you must pay attention to returning the joint to its place, extending it both internally and externally, and moving it left and right, for it will strongly return to its natural position and does not require further treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	However, if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a strong assistant and extend the arm of the patient from below, either by holding his hands or using a bandage that is wrapped around the arm above the elbow; another assistant should hold the hand of the patient upwards so that they place their hands under the armpits; then bind with a bandage over the root of the shoulder, and have another assistant hold the end of the bandage.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And when the extension of the limb or part within the armpit area towards the shoulder blade part, or from behind towards the back part.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And let the extension of all those at once be such that the patient is lifted with their body off the ground and remains hanging.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this type of extension is common to all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And therefore if the dislocation returns with what we have said, it will be good; and if not, then it is necessary in every way to speak of the proper treatment.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of the joint, when it is dislocated and the dislocation is inside, the patient should be laid on their side; then place the ligaments over the root of the thigh in that area between the head of the thigh and where the kneecap lies; then extend the ligament upwards from the knee area to the higher part of the fork (femur).
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	Then another strong assistant should take the arms of the patient, grasp the thick area of the diseased thigh firmly, and extend it outward with a powerful stretch, for this will cause it to return to its proper place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this method is a more gentle cure with which this member is reduced compared to the other methods.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	But if it is necessary for you and you do not obey the treatment with this method of cure entirely, then it is necessary to bind both feet of the patient together with a strong, gentle ligature, around both ankles and both toes.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And let the length of each thigh be the quantity of four fingers, and let the patient's chest be extended more than the other by the quantity of two fingers.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And then the patient should be suspended above the head of the pole, and it should be in a house; and the length from the ground should be the quantity of two arm lengths.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And then command a strong young man to grasp the head of the thigh, and have him suspended with the patient while another young man forcefully pushes the thigh, so that the joint returns to its place quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	Here is the translation line by line:
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And then two sticks are placed, one under the feet of the patient, and the other under the head; and then sticks adjusted to the middle of the bed are laid on top of which wet cloths are wrapped, so that the patient is not harmed by the stick being between their thighs, because you must ensure that the extension to the parts below is not hindered.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And then each minister extends to their part, and the doctor with his hand equalizes the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Thus, if you follow the reversal, it will heal greatly; and if not, place your attention on that diligently and in the same way as we have said for gout by equalizing it.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	But it is necessary that the patient lies on their side quietly.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is in the front part, then it is necessary that the chest be extended slightly, and this follows the same procedure as described for the bed; and the doctor places the palm of their right hand on the dislocated area, and then compresses that area with the other hand, and with that compression extends the affected part towards the head.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is in the posterior parts, then it is not necessary for the patient to be extended towards those parts, and they are raised above the ground; however, it must be that they lie on a hard surface, just as one should do if the shoulder of the patient is dislocated outwardly, according to what we have said about placing them across two shoulders; and they lie on their face with the limbs extended, as we have said, without delay.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And compression must be administered with a board on the place where you have put the joint.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Thus, when the reduction is completed as it should — and the sign that the reduction has been done is not hidden from you, which is to extend both arms of the patient, and when you see those equal and the patient extends their own arm and expands it with its natural curve, then you know that the limb has returned as it should — and now you adjust both sides and place padding and extend with a bandage so that the shoulder does not move in any part; and keep the patient at rest for three or four days.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And then loosen the bandage and the dressing, and compare one thigh with the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	When you see those marks appear clearly, then you know that the dislocation has been properly set, and then allow the patient to go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any cause for softening, then return and plaster that area, and extend it according to your initial structure, and leave it for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	Then loosen that area, and have the patient walk around for several days until it is strengthened and comforted.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On the treatment of dislocation of the jaw.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The jaw is dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated outward, inward, to the side more towards the back; and it is not dislocated forward.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of its dislocation is that you ask the patient to place their thigh against their cheek; then you will know that the jaw is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all manners of him is that you make the patient stand straight, ensuring that he extends his own back, if possible on it; press your two hands to his face, and place his foot between your feet; then bring his chin with your palms, and hold those between your fingers on his chin firmly, and another minister should extend his leg while the chin returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And a sign of recovery is that his chest adheres to his thigh without difficulty.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then apply a plaster to that and make the chest adhere to the thigh, then wrap those areas with a bandage for three or four days, and then unwrap them.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not let the patient walk for several days until they are healed and strengthened.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	But if the reduction for you is necessary, then administer strong extension with ligaments, as previously described in the treatment of the hip.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	On the treatment of dislocation of the talus.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The talus is sometimes displaced by a slight movement and sometimes dislocated completely, and the dislocation of it can occur either inward or outward.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of its dislocation is that sometimes the talus swells at the site to which it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	And here is the translation of the provided line:
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	And in the treatment when it is dislocated according to completion, you must make the patient stand straight, and have a strong and brave assistant from behind that person at the middle part of them.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And then you should hold the foot with your right hand on the higher side of it, and with your left hand on the lower side of the foot near the ankle.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with your left hand for two turns, and then extend with your left hand; and push the toes of the foot with your right hand away from the chest.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And do this two times as we have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then push the toes of the foot towards the chest for the third time, and you should be at the ankle.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	Thus, return it in one attempt or two following this method, and if you can rotate the foot, it is good; and if not, then repeat the operation on it until it returns.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if it is prohibited for you to reduce it by the method we have recommended, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and place a small bolster moistened in clay firmly between the patient's thighs, and you should wrap them with cloth so that the patient does not feel cold.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And then the minister holds the patient's thighs, and another minister extends the foot with his hands or with a band that lies across the ankle; and then each minister extends against the extension of their partner, and the penis is extended between the patient’s thighs holding it thus, so that the body does not pull back from its intended extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And then the doctor aligns the dislocation with his hands, and another minister holds the healthy thigh in place, so that the dislocation returns easily.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And then when the dislocation is returned and you confirm the health of the reduction, place a poultice and wrap it tightly with bandages, and bind the foot with bandages to the chest.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And you must be careful of the nerves that are behind the talus, so that the bandage over it is not too tight and does not compress them strongly.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And then leave it for two or three days; and if the bandage becomes loose, tighten it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And then remove the bandage on the third or fourth day, and prohibit the patient from walking for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	And if it is necessary to proceed beyond that space, there is no guarantee that the dislocation will not be dissolved and corrupted, and then it will not receive any cure.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if you encounter an abscess that needs cautery, then it is necessary to administer in its drainage what preceded our narration, in another place of treatment and application, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Capitol .xxxiiii.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	For the translation of the given line:
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	Cover that which is dislocated with slight extension of its joint; and this is not difficult, first be gentle.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	And if the dislocation is in some joints of the foot, then you must make the patient put his foot on the ground or on a table, and let him be thus as if he were walking. 
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And then you stand on the side, and place your foot over what you suspect to be the joints, and then press that area with your foot firmly enough for it to return into place, and ensure that it is properly aligned and does not appear prominent in its location.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And then place the patient's foot on a table that supports the entire foot, which has two ends, and then secure it with a proper and firm structure for three days; and then release it and let the patient rest and walk for several days, until it is strengthened and recovery is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter .xxxv.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Of the types of dislocations that are caused by blows or fractures or any combination thereof.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any of those causes occur, and you proceed with the treatment and restoration of it, death often follows.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And by this, one should not presume to treat it unless they are wise in the art, experienced for a long time, merciful and pious, cautious, not reckless nor presumptuous; and who begins with medicines that reduce inflammation sufficiently, and leaves the patient to divine judgment, but rather to someone from whom you hope for salvation from peril, relief from the illness, and in which there appears some hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And then strive to promptly reduce it at the beginning of the cause, before inflammation sets in.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then if the member returns as we wish, administer a regimen that reduces inflammation and treats the wound with one of the most drying ointments suitable for it.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if the dislocation is accompanied by a fracture and occurs in separately sutured bones, then you should perform the setting of them, and do as we have said in the simple diseases of this kind that precede in those areas.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And guard and avoid according to your virtue that which is in the pathways of fear as my preaching precedes you; for it is better to thy Creator thou do this, and more lasting to thy glory, and more healthful to thy body shall those be in thy time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.
Amen.	The term "Amen" is not specific to medieval medical treatises but is commonly used across many languages and contexts, often in religious or solemn settings. In this context:
