Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begin the words of Albucasis.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina,
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For the operation with hands is considered in our region and our time totally private, except that it strongly risks its knowledge and its traces remain; and nothing of it remains but some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have changed much and led to those errors and superstitions where the meanings of it are closed off and its force and art are weakened.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it seems to me that I revitalize that with the order of this treatise in such a way through exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and so that it comes with the forms of the tools of cautery and of the other instruments of the work as if by addition of the explanation, and for preparation of it, which cause is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	More the cause for which no good artisan is found with his skill in this our time, is that the art of medicine is long, and that it requires its practitioner to be exercised in the science of anatomy, which Galen recounts within what he knew of the joints of the members and their forms, and the conjunction and separation of them; and had knowledge of the bones, nerves, and ligaments, and their number, and their extension; and of the pulsating veins and the quiet ones, and the places of their emission.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And for this reason Hippocrates says that in the name it is much, but in the deed little, and especially in the art of the hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	But we have already said about this in the introduction of this book; for whoever is not knowledgeable about what we have said regarding anatomy, will not avoid falling into error through which many people may die, as I have seen too many of those who are formed in this science and destroy themselves with their own knowledge and experience.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For I saw an inexperienced and ignorant doctor incise an scrotal abscess on a woman's groin, and accidentally cut some arteries in the groin, causing a great deal of blood to flow, so that the woman died in the arms of those attending her.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another doctor who attempted to remove a stone from a man who had suffered in his condition, and the stone was large, and he came to him and extracted that stone with a piece of the bladder, for which that man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I have already attempted to extract it, and saw that due to the size of the stone and the position of the patient, I understood that he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And you saw another doctor who was receiving payment from a duke of our land for surgery, and he came to a castrated black man who had a fracture in his thigh; and the doctor prepared with his ignorance, extracted the fracture, on the wound, with cushions and splints with strong binding, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And then loosen the bandage according to his desires, and raise him up, and let him rest for some days and command that we loosen the binding; and thus stay until the thigh and foot become free of inflammation and reach recovery.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I was called to him, and prepared to loosen the binding, and calm was achieved and relief came from his pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	However, if corruption was already confirmed in the limb, because it could not be restrained, and the corruption did not cease to spread within the limb until the patient was in peril.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And you see another doctor who perforated a cancerous abscess, and it became ulcerated around ten days later, during which time the malignancy of it was increased by its lord.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And by this, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation be divided into two parts: one part of the operation which is associated with health, and one part in which there is danger in the most critical dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already pointed this out throughout this book where I describe an operation that involves error and fear; therefore, it is necessary for you to keep this in mind and let go of the other, so that the pages do not provide a way to speak and dishonor you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore, take up your arms with diligence and the protection of God, and face your illnesses with happiness and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best way by the grace of God to achieve salvation and honorable success, and avoid terrible illnesses that are difficult to heal, and keep your defenses against what makes you fear, so that hesitation in your faith and in your name does not escape you: for more enduring is your glory, and greater still in this world and afterwards in your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Gualia already discusses in some of his monographs:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Do not treat bad illnesses, lest you be named a bad doctor.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have divided this book into three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter is ordered concerning the insertion into the feet, in the forms of the instruments and in the tools of the cauteries, and of what is necessary for the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, on drying and puncturing, and on cupping, and on plasters, and on the extraction of arrows and similar objects, all chaptered and ordered according to the forms of the instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	The division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the treatment of sprains and similar conditions; a chapter ordered concerning insertion into the feet and the forms of the instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	On cauteries with fire and sharp medicine and a reminder of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	With this, the treatise on the entire book begins.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	It is necessary for me to speak of the benefits of that cautery and its harms, and in what conditions the use of a cautery is prohibited.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore, I say that the discussion about the quality of the usefulness and harm of cauterization is long and verbose, subtle by science, and secretive; and many wise people have already spoken much about it, and there are disagreements among them, and for me a small part of their discussions is enough, fearing lengthiness.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore, I say that cautery is beneficial to all complexions universally, whether they are with matter or without matter, except for two complexions, which are cold complexions without matter.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the cold and dry complexion with matter, there is disagreement; for some say that cautery is beneficial for that, and others say the opposite, that cautery is not suitable for a disease that is by quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inappropriate for a cold and dry disease to be treated with something that is burnt and dry.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And let it be said by those who argue the opposite, that cautery brings benefit to all cold and dry diseases that occur in human bodies, because when you compare the body of a person and its moistures to the nature of fire, you find the human body to be moist.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say by the speech of that person, who has experienced this several times to my observation.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	However, it is not necessary for someone who has already been thoroughly instructed and exercised in the chapter of cautery through prior practice, and who has understood the diversity of human composition and the disposition of diseases within them, and their causes, as well as the accidents related to them, and the duration of these.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	However, in other compositions, there is no need for fear, especially in cold and wet diseases, because all doctors agree on these, and they do not disagree about treating them with cautery.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, sons, that the secret of healing through cautery with fire and its effectiveness lies in cautery using combustible medicine, because fire is simple, and its action only reaches the member being cauterized and does not affect the adjacent member except with minimal harm.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	However, the action of combustible medicine reaches those members to which it spreads, and it can greatly bring about difficult-to-heal diseases in the affected member and severely aggravate them.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	However, fire, by its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, does not do this but rather purges. We have already known through experience and long study of the art about the truth of causes; and for that reason, I am excused from the lengthiness of speech. And if it were not for the fact that my book has not been read in this brief pause, where the secret is hidden with fire, and the quality of its operation on bodies and its expulsion by which diseases are expelled, demonstrated with philosophical argumentative speech, which would sharpen your minds.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, sons, that they forget the time in which it is appropriate to perform cautery and pause at the best time of spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that cautery is appropriate at all times, so that the harm caused by accidental time is overshadowed by the benefit of what is drawn out with the cautery, and especially if the cautery is for necessary pains or severe pains, which do not tolerate delay because it is feared that mischief may come from them, which is greater than a small harm entering over time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And this does not fall into your feet, or, sons, this is not esteemed except by the common people and foolish doctors; therefore, to that disease which is cured by cautery it is not recommended at all times, and they pause on that consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not as they think it to be for this reason, because cautery is merely a medical procedure that alters the composition and dries out the humors which are the cause of the pain.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	But nevertheless, cauteries are excessive in medicine due to the desire for its health benefits and the power of its operation and the greatness of its master.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that his illness may return at some time in the future, according to the condition of the patient and the location of their illness, and their strength, and what is formed within the body from the accumulation of excesses within them, and what they acquire through food and similar causes; but for the illness in which a cautery is administered, it should be an illness subtle in limbs with few excesses and moistures, just as in dental cauterization for pain and similar cases, it is possible that no such pain will return to him, though this is done in small measure.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And it is commonly said that cautery is the last resort of medicine, and this saying is true, not in the sense that those who understand it mean, for I believe that it is not a cure that benefits through medicine or any other cause before cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is contrary to that; the intention that cautery is the last resort of medicine is only when we administer methods of cure in some illnesses, and those medicines do not confer benefit, and then at the end of the treatment, cautery is administered, and it proves effective for that.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And from here on out, the cautery is considered the last resort of medicine, not according to the understanding that the common people and many foolish doctors have.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they said this only because of the purity of gold and the excellence of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the site of cautery does not matter, which is not absolutely true, for I have tested this and found that it is only effective in some bodies but not others, and cautery with gold is good and better than with iron as they said; however, when you perform cautery with fire using gold, it is not straightforward, for it ignites according to the amount you want due to the hardness of the gold, which prepares it to receive heat; and if you place it over fire, the gold melts from the heat, causing some sheets to fall into the fire, which can occupy the craftsman.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And because of this, cautery with iron should be performed more lightly and more carefully to ensure the correctness of the operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already arranged this chapter concerning cautery according to sections, and I have ordered those of the head among the feet, so that I can quickly provide the inquirer with what they seek from it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Of cautery for headache caused by coldness and humidity.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cautery is applied to humidity and coldness on the affected area, which are the causes of excessive sweating and rheumatic fluxes called running from the head to the regions of the eyes and ears, as well as causing much sleepiness, toothache, and throat pain, and generally all diseases that come from cold, such as paralysis, apoplexy, and similar ailments.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cautery is as follows: first, command the patient to be purged with a laxative medicine for cleansing the head for three or four nights, according to the strength of the patient, their age, and their habits.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command that they shave their head with a razor. Then have the patient sit between your hands on a lowered bench and place their hands on their feet.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	Then place the tip of your palm near the root of the nose between their eyes.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, when the middle part of the area you mentioned has been reached, mark that spot with a probe, and then ignite the olive-shaped cautery, which is of this form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then place that over the marked area with caution, in such a way that it descends gradually, with which your hand is pressed little by little, and you turn that.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then lift your hand gently and look at the area, and if you see that any amount of bone is uncovered, like the size of a grain of barley, then raise your hand, and if it does not return by lifting with that tool, try another one, and if it has cooled down, until you can see the bone as I have told you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a little salt and dissolve it over the area and leave it for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then place over it a cloth soaked in vinegar and leave it there until the heat of the burn is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with a tetrapharmacum ointment until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And they have also said that when the wound remains open, it is better to wash it with honey, because it is better and more beneficial.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And some of them say that the area around the bone should be cauterized, and the cautery should be held until some part of the substance of the bone adheres to it.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then scrape away what is attached to the bone, and then clean it.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And others said that with the cautery, one should reach the rear area, pressing strongly into the bone until it smokes, and this is the method of performing a small alveolation.
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they believe that from that place, vapors emanate from the head.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And the wound should be kept open for a long time, and then it should be treated until it is healed and solidified.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	But I have not seen these two types of cautery used on everyone, but rather in some people out of necessity; and leave that aside, you must tell me, it is better for health when it occurs; for the head is affected by a disruption of continuity in this way as we have testified in other body parts, and more so when the patient's head is of a fragile nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first type of cautery is safer and better, you must tell me; and with that method and by working in this way, it is more beneficial to health.
Capitol segon.	Second chapter.
Del cauteri del cap.	About the cautery of the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When chronic and long-lasting headaches occur throughout the head and are prolonged in the patient, and remedies such as plasters, compresses, enemas, poultices, ointments, salves, and similar treatments have been used, and especially if the head has already been cauterized with a cautery that did not help and provided no benefit from those causes, then consider whether the patient's head is of strong constitution by nature; and it is not frail and suffers great cold, in which case you should cauterize it again with another type of cautery leaving this one for a while.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	Then cauterize that area on the crown of their head with a cautery until the vein is divided.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the vein and expose the quantity that we have mentioned from the bone, then cauterize it with a cautery at the back of the head in the area called the sinus, which is where the cupping glass is placed.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And be gentle with your hand in this procedure, and do not expose the bone, because the patient will suffer great pain from this, different from the pain of all other head cautery procedures.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I will describe this cautery in its place, for the cautery with which you cauterize the horns of the head and the occiput is a finer cautery than that with which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is its form.
Capitol ters.	Capitol ters.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Of the cauterization of non-traditional migraines. 
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When severe pain occurs in the head region or if there is pain within the skull, cleanse the head with purifying medicines and administer the other treatment which I have mentioned in the descriptions of diseases; and if all this does not help, then cauterization on it is done in two ways: either by cauterizing with a sharp burning medicine, or by iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	Using cauterization with a burning medicine means that you should take a piece of cloth, and clean it, then bind the ends of it from both sides. 
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then you cut into the painful area on the temple with a slanted lancet where you have made the incision, until it is covered.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And then press on it with a bandage by continuous compression, and leave it for the span of three hours; then remove the bandage and apply something else, and let the wound be exposed for two or three days, and then place upon it cloth submerged in butter until the area becomes warm.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with ointment until it heals.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you want, do this with some caustic medicines, which I have written about in the two treatises on caustic medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	You may perform cauterization with an iron according to this method: use a cautery iron which has the following form:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	It is called a "claw," because the head of it is shaped like a clove with some curvature, and in the middle of it there is a small prominence.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And then place it over the painful area, and keep your hand steady — so that the artery beneath does not stick — and rotate the iron little by little with speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the quantity that is adhered by the pressure of the bandage is such that it covers half of it, lift your hand so that the artery underneath is not compressed, so that blood flow does not stop.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then soak a cloth in saltwater and place it on the area, and leave it there for three days; then apply a cloth soaked with ointment, and continue treating it with salve until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you must, cauterize using the tip of the cautery instrument as a cautery tool, and be careful not to cut into the artery in this specific, non-traditional area.
Capitol quart.	Chapter four.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	On the cauterization of the traditional area.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat the traditional area with what we have said about the previous treatment and what we have mentioned in the divisions of diseases, and if the treatment does not improve, and sometimes due to the severity of the disease, what we have described of the first cautery with medicine or the cautery with fire is insufficient, then you must heat the cautery knife until it becomes white-hot, and mark the area of pain with a line as long as half a finger or so; then lift your hand once and press that area before cutting into the artery and reaching the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to be careful with the continuity of the jaw, which is damaged by chewing, and that the tendon is not adhered and the nerve that affects it, and that it does not result in spasm.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the care and caution of blood flow from an artery that is to be cut, for there is fear in cutting it, especially for one who does not know what they are doing and is not studious or experienced; and leave the operation at its beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And I come with a reminder of the regimen for blood flow accidents from arteries according to its manner, in its place within this book. 
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see that this disease is not cured by this cautery and the body of the patient seems tolerable, apply the cautery to the middle of the head as we have recounted, and treat the plague until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you wish, administer the cautery that we have described in the chapter on arrow wounds with a cautery having two blades, and this is a better and more suitable cautery.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	On the cautery of ear pains.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When pain in the ear comes from cold and is treated with laxatives and with the other treatments I have mentioned in the division, and if the pain is not alleviated, then apply the cautery. This one is called "puncta," and it has the following form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And then apply the puncta near the ignition, and move it around the entire ear as a wheel is rotated, or along the circumference of each part if the pain is in specific parts.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Stretch out with the cautery of the earlobe little by little until you have felt the area with your hand.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery of these points is done throughout the entire ear, and dry it out, then treat the areas inside until they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	Capitol .vi.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	From the cautery of tortoise [this line is metaphorical or likely referring to a specific medical procedure involving heat or burning, possibly in relation to treating an ailment associated with the term "tortoise," which might symbolize a condition or part of the body].
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cautery of the kind that leads to drying out or spasm of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that kind of tumor with purges and fumigations and poultices, and if your treatment does not provide comfort, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries: the first should be at the earlobe, the second a little below the temple, and the third should be at the junction of the two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And place your cautery on the opposite side of the diseased part, for moistening does not occur except in the area that appears healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the method of cautery is to cauterize at the uppermost part of the outer ear directly above the horn of the head, and on another temple, the length of which should be according to the length of the little finger, and then place your hand with the cautery until half the thickness of the skin is burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cautery, which is a type of surgical instrument, the shape of which is described below.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	But however more subtle it is than that which you see slightly thus; and it must be that this in the place of excessive thickness, somewhat.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with what has been previously prepared until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	It seems like you've indicated a chapter or section heading, specifically "Capitol .vii." which likely translates to "Chapter Seven" in English. If you have any text from this chapter that needs translation or explanation, please provide it, and I'll be happy to help!
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	This line appears to be in a language similar to medieval Latin or Old French and refers to the treatment of an old type of apoplexy using cautery. Here is a translation into English:
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is chronic and has been treated with what we have said but your treatment does not agree and the patient does not have fever, then cauterize that area with four cauteries: on all corners of their head; and with a cautery at the middle part of the head as we have said; and with a cautery in the neck.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the method of the cautery is done according to what has been said above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it has already been cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; and it is more towards the back; then it should be treated with what you proceed to use.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	On cauterization for forgetfulness caused by flames.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	It is necessary to give the patient at the beginning large seeds and pills that purify the sperm.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	Then shave the entire head of the patient and apply a plaster of cedar on their neck, as described in the treatise on plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And apply that several times, for that is a method of cautery.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do this according to that method ordered by the doctor of whom I have already spoken.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And thus if that healing is good; and if not, then apply three cauteries to the lower part of his head, which should descend from the highest part of the head towards the part closest to the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And leave the width of one thick finger between each cautery, and then treat the cautery as has been described.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	But if you add more and the patient can tolerate it, then apply the cautery to the middle area; and if you want to increase it further, now cauterize the area over both sides (corns).
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Then treat that area until it is healed; and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to the form previously given.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On the cauterization of the paraphysis and the soothing of the entire body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	You should proceed with the soothing of the head using jars and as we have said; then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize it with a cautery in the middle of the head, and with cauteries over all the horns (bony prominences) of the head, and with a cautery on the back part of it, and with three cauteries over the vertebrae of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the illness of excessive softening of the body and the patients tolerate it and the illness is severe, then cauterize that area with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and finally with a cautery inside where the spinal cord is located, and raise your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And then treat that which needs to be healed, and this should be done with an olive cautery.
Capitol .x.	It appears you've provided a section marker, "Capitul .x.", which seems to indicate the start of Chapter 10 in a medieval text or document. Without additional context or content from this chapter, I can't provide further translation or explanation. If you have specific sentences or paragraphs from this chapter that you'd like translated or explained, please provide them, and I'll be happy to assist you!
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	This line appears to be the title or heading of a section in an ancient medical text. It translates to:
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And therefore, you must clean the brain of the patient at the beginning with herbs and with the other cure that we have mentioned in the section when the disease is severe and the patient can tolerate the exception of the medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who cannot tolerate the medicines, then administer small doses and masticatory substances that are mild, for several days beforehand, with an improvement in the foods.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize that with a cautery in the middle of the head according to the previous method, and with another cautery on the back of the head, and on each temple of the head it should be cauterized.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize that with the cauteries I have mentioned, to induce paralysis and softening of the body over the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And let it be an olive cautery according to what is preceded.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is a child, then use a gentle cautery according to this method.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On the cauterization for melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humors and thick phlegm, then cauterize that with the cauteries we have mentioned to induce paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is an excess that turns to melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give them something to drink that purifies their brain according to what has been previously stated in the section.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And then shave the head of the patient, and then make a properly formed crown on top of the circle, and then place that in the middle of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And the patient should be seated down, and held from all sides.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	Then apply an ointment; and it is better to use sheep's fat.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And warm that over the fire with moderate heat, which the said patient can tolerate when it is applied to them.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	Then place that at the top of their head in a circle and spread it so that it is rubbed in.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do this with the patient once a week for a whole week, along with other good treatments until they are healed; or if you prefer, cauterize that area by making small points according to the worst part of it, but hold your hand with a cautery arranged in this manner: this is a special type of cautery which moistens the brain equally.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	Then place that cloth dipped in fat or in pigeon droppings.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On the cautery of water descending into the ear.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When it is declared that the beginning of water in the head has started by the signs which I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient something that purifies his head, and protect it from all moisture.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And make that person sweat in a bath for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And then command that he shave his head, and cauterize that area with a cautery at the center of the head; and then cauterize that area with two cauteries on both temples if it is the beginning of water discharge from both eyes, or from one side if it is the start of water discharge from one eye.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	And with a cautery, incise all the veins and arteries that are below the chin; and let the cauteries be at that length along the width of the temples. 
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And be careful of blood flows when it is being cauterized; and if you see any blood flow, stop it with some medicine, which is within your capability.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And come with the wisdom of extracting veins and cutting them, and being cautious of blood flow.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And sometimes it is cauterized on the head between two bones with two cauters specifically made for this purpose.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	On the cauterization of old tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears of the eyes are old and persistently affect the veins and arteries that are visibly located on the outside of the head, and it is confirmed that this is due to cold excess phlegm, then cauterize those areas using a cautery as described in the chapter on the beginning of water flowing into the eyes. Use a cautery at the middle of the head and two cauters between the temples, and two cauters between the bones of the forehead.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if additional treatment is needed, then cauterize the area on the outer side of the eye above the eyebrow's end with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Capitol .xiiii.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	From the cautery of nasal odor.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat that ailment with what we have said in the division and your treatment does not improve, then prepare and give to drink to the patient decoctions for three nights; then shave his head, and cauterize the area moderately with an olive wood cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	Then cauterize that area with a carnation cautery using two cauteries on both eyebrows, leaving the hair slightly untouched.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And be careful with the artery so that you do not burn it.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And this is the form of the carnation cautery.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On the cautery for softening the eyelids of wounds.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the eye is softened due to illness or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with this lunar cautery; and this is its form:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you do, cauterize that area slightly on both eyebrows with two cauteries in all parts, and extend them away from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but rather to the extent that the third part of the eyelid is adhered.
Capitol .xvi.	The text you've provided appears to be in an archaic form of Romance language that draws from Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. The given line is not a medical prescription or description but rather a chapter heading:
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	From the cautery of the eyelid when the hairs are converted into particles inside and punch the eye.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hairs of the nose are converted into internal growths that cause the nose to hurt, cautery is applied in two ways, either with iron or with a burning medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If with fire using cautery, command the patient before that they shave their own hair as those who clean them do, until they are long and trimmed; and if you grasp it by its root, then hold the skin of them with a bandage so that it is not hurt until the hairs grow back. 
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Therefore, when they are born and swaddled, then place the head of the patient on your lap, and then mark above the eyelids of their eyes with a sign, which should be according to the shape of a mulberry leaf, and let the beginning of the sign be close to the hair.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And then place a cloth dipped in egg white or in a paste of lint over the eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And then ignite the cautery, which has this shape.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And then cauterize over the figure you have marked, little by little, in separate spots, until the surface of the chain, which is like a myrtle leaf, is thoroughly burned and clearly visible.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	The sign of the healthiness of your work is that you see the eyelid already contracted and the hairs around it raised due to the puncture of the eye.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And then raise your hand and leave it for three days, and then place a cloth over it with ointment until the scab is healed.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with an ointment until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	And if any cause returns through the hairs near their roots and the eyelid is softened, then apply the cautery again on that area just as you did initially.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	And if the hairs are on the eyelid, then cauterize that area until it rises to its natural position and is smoothed out so that the hairs do not scratch the eye.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And the cautery with a burning medicine commands the patient to pluck the hairs until they are elongated and smoothed out, and then make a form like a miter leaf from linen cloth.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And then take soap known and fresh ash one uncia or as much as that, and then thoroughly mix those ingredients without causing friction; and then spread this over the cloth which is made like a miter leaf shape, and place that on one eye or both; and place under the eyelid a piece dipped in egg white, and the patient's head should be tilted towards you.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And place the finger on the medicine and press it slightly and do not move your hand until the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for the bite is in him as if from fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And when you perceive that the tumor has a biting sensation, then leave the medicine and hold it with your finger; when the biting stops, remove the medicine and wash the wound with water; and now consider if the eyelid is already lifted as washed, you must loosen the constriction with fire or incision, for now it is good; and if not, return to applying the medicine on the area where it has not taken effect and does not discolor until your operation is completed and the wound contracts.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	Then place a pad on the wound with bandages until the chain of adhesion is removed, and then treat it with an ointment or another remedy until it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you to carefully guard your operation so that no excess of the medicine falls into the wound. If the eyelid softens after a few days and some hair begins to grow in the wound, then reapply your medicine to the area where the eyelid has softened, just as you did at the beginning, and continue treating it until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the form of the mirtla leaf. 
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And know that the veins of men are diverse according to their size and smallness, and therefore according to this your treatment is made.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And do not hide the path of thorough treatment from one who is studying this art.
Capitol .xvii.	It seems like you've provided a chapter or section heading, "Capitul .xvii.", which translates to "Chapter XVII" in English. This indicates the start of the seventeenth chapter in a text, but without additional content from this chapter, there isn't further context to translate or explain. If you have specific lines or content from Chapter XVII that you would like translated or explained, please provide them!
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On the cautery of a fistula that is in the lacrimal duct of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula with what we have said in the divisions of diseases and do not achieve your cure, then it is necessary that you cauterize it according to this method: command the patient to place his head on your thigh, and hold the patient’s head between your hands in such a way that it is neither uncomfortable nor agitated by his own head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	Then apply some infused egg white or a paste of flour on the wound of it (the patient).
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then heat the cautery, which has the following form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which should be hollow, like the shape of a reed or a vulture's quill, at one end where the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you wish, it can penetrate through the other end.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want, it should be done in such a way that it penetrates.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	However, the one that is concave is better for your work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And then press the fistula if it is open, and draw out the pus and dry that area.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And then place the well-ignited cautery over it, and hold that with your hand a little away from the nostril's opening, so that your hand does not burn or disturb the patient, and then place the cautery in the nasal passage and cauterize that area.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And if at the beginning of your cautery you penetrate into the bone, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice as needed; and leave it like that for three days, and then place a bandage over the wound and surround it with a drying ointment until it heals.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	But if ten days have passed and it has not healed, then apply a sharp corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed and scraped as necessary according to its chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And there is another method of cautery for a fistula which some earlier practitioners said: extend to the location of the fistula and open it, then place in that fissure a thin wire shaped like it; pour into that the quantity of one inch of melted lead; hold the wire firmly with your hand so that the patient is not harmed by the melted lead reaching their nostril; cover the patient’s nostril area with egg white or water, for the lead adheres to the fistula location and heals it miraculously.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about the cautery and treatment, that is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer a probe into the nose and reduce the fistula to the body of the nose according to how it will come to its proper place.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	Of the cautery of the fissure of the anus.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Motives or reasons for accidents causing cracks in the lips, especially in children's lips.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, when you treat those cracks with what we have said in the divisions and your cure does not improve, then apply a small knife-like cautery according to this form that is shown:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And the cavity should be adjusted according to the subtlety of such a condition. 
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	And carefully place that heated instrument into those fissures so that the cautery reaches the depth of the fissures.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with ointment until it heals.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On the cautery of a fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When in the base of the uvula or on the palate or at the roots of the teeth there forms an abscess, and it then becomes inflamed, and subsequently bursts, and later becomes chronic, with pus flowing out and a fistula forming, and if you treat that without success for healing, then you must heat a cautery according to the size received in the fistula, and then place that heated iron into the tract of the fistula, holding your hand so that the hot iron reaches the depth of it. At the end, this should be done once or twice; and then treat it with what we have said about the treatment until it heals.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And if the pus is drained and it heals, that is good; but if not, then it is necessary to expose the area and remove the corrupted bone as will be detailed in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Capitol .xx.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	Of cautery of the teeth and of softening of the veins.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the veins are softened by humidity and the teeth are painful, and you treat those with medicines but without success, then place the patient's head on your knee, and soon light the cautery which will come close to this: in such a way that you place the quill over the tooth and quickly insert the heated cautery into it, and hold your hand slightly inside so that the patient can feel the heat of the fire reach the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	Then remove your hand, and then repeat the cautery several times as you wish.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	Then the patient should rinse his mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, and afterward spit it out, for the painful tooth is fixed, the softened gum is strengthened, and the corrupted humidity is dried.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On the cautery for toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is caused by cold, or if it is frozen or inflamed, or if you do not succeed in curing it with medicine, then apply cautery in two ways: either use a cow's horn for cautery, or use fire for cautery.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Here is the translation of the given sentence line by line into English:
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then repeat that several times until the heat from the fire reaches the root of the teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you want, soak wool or cloth in the aforementioned bath, and place that on the painful tooth, and place a heated iron over it until the heat reaches the core of the tooth's cavity.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, when using cautery with fire, you should pay attention to the tip of the reed or iron, and it should be somewhat blunt so that the intensity of the heat does not reach the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	Then heat the cautery tool to the desired shape, and place it on the tooth while holding it until the cautery is cooled; do this several times until the pain subsides, whether on that day or the next day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And it is necessary that before applying the cautery, the patient fills their mouth with good broth and holds it for an hour, then spits it out. This is the form of the cautery application.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize whichever extremity as you see fit according to what is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the form of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	Capitol .xxii.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	From the cauterization of extroflexed [or possibly 'ectopic'] growths.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When the swellings are due to phlegm and cold humors and do not respond to digestion through medicines and you want to digest those lightly, then ignite the cautery which has a form as follows, having two curved ends so that smoke can escape from one end of the cautery while placing that ignited part over the swelling once, and again if needed, until it reaches the core of the swelling.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the swelling is small, then place the cautery according to the size of the swelling, and afterward leave it for three days and place over it a cloth dipped in oil until what the fire has burned is removed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	Then treat it with ointment and bandages until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the form of the cannula or cautery for this purpose is as follows.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On the cautery for hoarseness of voice and constriction of the windpipe.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When the moistures come upon the canal of the lung, and especially when this is due to cold constitution, then it is necessary that the patient be purged at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that area by applying the cautery near the root of the throat.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And be careful not to penetrate too deeply with the cautery into the groin, nor burn more of the skin than necessary.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize that area with another cautery at the joint of the neck in the last vertebra of the spine.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And the cautery should be applied in the manner previously described.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Then treat that area with the method described until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On the cauterization for lung disease and cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung disease are caused by infiltrating humidities, and the patient does not have a fever or consumption and the illness is long-standing, then cauterize that area with two cauteries on the furcula at the points near the lungs and ribs; and with another cautery in the middle of the foot between the two mounds; and let the cautery be applied as previously described.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, perform your cauterization with a punctual cautery called "puncta," the form of which is described previously in the section on ear pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And make points in those areas; then treat that with the method you use which is preceded by ensuring it is healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And here is the translation for the given sentence:
Capitol .xxv.	Capitol .xxv.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	Of the cauterization of warts which is the head of the aid.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the joint is dislocated due to slippery humidity and not fixed at the time of its normal return, you must place the dislocation back into its customary position before it settles, and then with a slight movement, it will fall into place as we have testified. Therefore, first reduce the dislocation, and then turn the patient over onto their back or side; and then lift the tendon that is inside the joint towards the upper parts using the fingers of your left hand, if the joint is dislocated on the inner part.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then heat the cautery that has two heads; and this is its form:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the tendon before it penetrates into the other side; and the figure of the cautery will come to have four heads.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And thus those subtleties depend on the amount of tension; and this is its form:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And sometimes it is adjusted according to this method, and that is why there are eight cauters.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then place porous twigs with salt over the cautery, and then make sure the patient is in tranquility, and do not move the limb for some time until it is comforted.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is above and this has happened, then apply a cautery over the muscle with a nail-shaped cautery or with multiple pointed cauters, for the joint is confirmed and moisture is reduced, and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On cautery of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When cold and various humidities come into the stomach, causing it to extend beyond its natural composition and multiply phlegm within it, if you continue with methods of cure without confirming [the condition], then the patient should lie on their back, extend their arms and legs, and then apply a cautery at that spot using three cauters: place one cautery below the feet for the length of a finger with a nail-shaped cautery, and with two other cauters beside each side of this cautery so that the shape forms a triangular cautery; space them out so they are not too close to cause excessive burning.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is two-thirds the thickness of the chain.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And the shape of the cautery is according to this form with addition, And if you want, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle part of the stomach according to this form; and this should be a cautery according to the form of a circle according to this form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And let the stomach be punctured and cauterized at those points where one is frightened by this cautery: you should prick the stomach according to the amount you wish with a probe, then cauterize those points with a cautery, and then treat it with the treatment that precedes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	Of the cold cautery of the spleen.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When pain occurs in the abdomen due to coldness or moisture or from excessive wind causing its normal composition to be thrown out by superfluous egression, and the patient is treated as we have said and does not improve, then the patient must lie on their back with a pillow under their head, and apply three cauteries according to this form and quantity placed on the abdomen below the hypochondria, thus allowing the person's position for lying down.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And the space between each cautery should be according to the thickness of a finger, and the cauteries should be placed according to the length of the body straight.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not move the cauteries around once they are applied.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the amount that is added equals half the weight of the chain, and it should not be more tightly adjusted; and if the patient is standing on their feet; and if they are not standing, then they should lie down, with their limbs already extended, and raise their arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is possible for you to cauterize these areas with a knife-shaped cautery, when you do so with subtlety and prudence in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And be careful not to process too much during the cauterization, and let the spirit of the entire chain adhere so that the whole body adheres and penetrates into the intestines, for the chain here is subtle; know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On the puncturing of an abscess in the liver with a cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When there is excrescence or an abscess in the liver and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the liver or in its membrane, then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the patient will show signs of heaviness and acute pain.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the membrane of the liver, the pain is extremely acute and often even exhausts the doctors treating it.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, the patient should be placed face down on their cervit (likely referring to some form of support or bed); then probe the area of the abscess with a tent (possibly a slender instrument); and then ignite the cautery, which resembles a rag, the form of which has been described on the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize with that pointed cautery until all the wound is charred, until it reaches the bone, until pus comes out.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	Then treat that area with the healing of other swellings until it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And one should not use this form of cautery except by someone whose study in the art of medicine is prolonged, and who has recognized many diseases; although sometimes even with experience one might be bold in this operation, yet it is better to leave it to those who are more skilled.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On the cautery of pleurisy.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	The ancients said that cauterization of pleurisy using the root of aristolochia was effective, and this is done by taking a piece of the dried root of aristolochia, which should be as long as you can find, and about the thickness of a finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then submerge it in oil and heat it over the fire, and then cauterize using a cautery at the location between the continuation of the clavicle and the neck; with two small cauteries, place them slightly below the area under the chin, and with two cauteries on the part that slopes between the fifth rib and the spine, sloping slightly towards the back; and with another cautery in the middle of the foot; and one over the stomach; and with three cauteries on the parts behind; and with a cautery at the location between the two shoulders; and with two cauteries on both sides of the foot, placing the cautery that is between the two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And you should not hold your hand with the cautery, but rather place it on the visible part of the chain while working.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And already the ancients said that some of these men who use an iron cautery shaped like a ray and heat it up, then place it in that area which is between the ribs, until they reach the abscess with it and evacuate the corrupted matter, just as we have said regarding the abscess on the liver.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	And in this perforation with cautery there is no fear, for one dies as soon as you perform it at the site of the fistula which has no cure.
Capitol .xxx.	The text you've provided appears to be in an early form of Romance language that shows influences from Latin and its descendants. However, the phrase "Capitol .xxx." is a heading rather than part of a medical treatise. It might indicate the start of chapter thirty or section thirty within a larger work.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Of the cautery of the armpit.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat the disease of the armpit with what we have said about the treatment in the division and do not achieve a cure, then apply cautery according to three methods, all of which are correct. One of these is to make three or four linear cauteries along the length of the armpit according to the shape of the liver cauteries, the form of which has been described previously.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And there should be the thickness of a finger or a little more between each cautery, and the method of the cautery should be the same method we have described for the liver cautery.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not move your hand while applying the cautery; and the patient should be lying on their back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And another method of cautery is to ignite the cautery vertically twice, the reason for which we have mentioned in the chapter on muscle dislocation, and lift the chain that is in the direction of the armpit according to the position of the left-side lying patient.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And let your elevation be such that you raise the chain according to the length of the body, so that cauteries may be made according to the width of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	Then insert the two burning ends into that opening through which you introduce the chain from the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	Then remove the cautery; and thus four cauteries have been made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you wish, cauterize using a cautery with three burning points.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	Then you treat the cautery after it has stopped bleeding for several days, because it is more beneficial than other previous causes in the treatment. 
Capitol .xxxi.	Capitol .xxxi.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	Of the cauterization of dropsy.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you treat the dropsical with the methods of cure that we have mentioned in the division and do not achieve your treatment, then it is necessary to cauterize with four cauters around the navel, and one cautery on the stomach, and another cautery on the liver, and another cautery on the spleen, and two cauters between the vertebrae of the back, and one cautery in the middle of the foot, and another cautery on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the depth of the cautery should be proportional to the severity of the condition.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	Then leave the cautery open so that it bleeds for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the patient during the treatment by merely cauterizing, because it is necessary to add two intentions to them, and thus they will be quickly aided in their recovery.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery with which the abdomen is cauterized should be claw-shaped, as previously described, and the shape of the cautery with which the back is cauterized should be olive-shaped, as previously described.
Capitol .xxxii.	Capitol .xxxii.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	From the cautery of feet and of the thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are inflamed in dropsy and filled with watery fluid, you must cauterize the feet on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger, and lift your hand with the cautery without twisting it; then raise your hand, but do not completely return it, because the watery fluid descends.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The cautery should be in this form: Then make two cauteries on both thighs, and each one should be made with the blade end of a knife-shaped cautery.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And the cautery should be according to the length of the thigh: place one at the top and the other at the middle of the thigh; and on each thigh, two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And leave the wound open for a long time so that some fluid can drain from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	Then treat it with those causes which we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On the cautery of the abdominal area.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the abdominal region is weakened by cold and moisture inside, which diminishes the powers, namely the digestive and retentive functions that are located in the stomach and intestines, it should be treated with curative methods and not contrary to these. Sometimes patients have endured cautery for exhibiting those powers; therefore, apply a large cauterization on their stomach according to previous cautery of the stomach, using a circular cautery and four around the subtle umbilical region, using a subtle nail-shaped cautery; or use a cautery on the alvine [related to the intestines] area over aloes granules, or with two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if you need to remove excessive moisture and the patient can tolerate it, then apply cautery over the navel and the intestines, strengthening them by placing two cauterizations on the stomach and near the inguinal area, for this is a perfect cure that does not fail.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On the cautery of old hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When there are old hemorrhoids by nature or one caused by thick cold humors or corrupted moisture, and they are treated with the methods we have mentioned in the division and not contrary to these treatments, then apply cautery using three cauteries on the pus near the lower small vertebrae, arranged in a small triangular shape, and also use a cautery above the navel by two fingers.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you suspect that the patient’s stomach is chilled and their food is not digested, and their face becomes inflamed, then cauterize that area on the stomach with a large cautery as previously described; and with one cautery on the spleen, and with another cautery on the liver using a claw-shaped cautery, leave the cautery open for some time, and then care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	It seems like you've provided a section marker or chapter heading from a text, specifically "Capitul .xxxv." which translates to "Chapter XXXV" in English. This indicates the start of Chapter Thirty-Five in the original document. If you have more content from this chapter that needs translation or explanation, feel free to share it!
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	Regarding the cauterization near the removal of the ailment.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you amputate an artery, then you apply the cautery that resembles a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then insert the ignited cautery into the severed artery and push your hand firmly until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood comes.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do this once or twice, for if there are too many, then cauterize each of them as we have described, and then treat them with ointments until they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery on any area, it is more harmful to healing.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XXXVI.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	On the cauterization of fistulas that are naturally harmful in those areas.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the treatment we have recommended in its proper place, and the patient is frightened by it, then heal them with a cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when someone has a fistula that is naturally harmful and old, which discharges pus and corrupted humors, it is best to probe it with a fine needle, and then determine the depth of it with the aforementioned needle.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then heat the cautery that resembles a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	Then place the heated cautery into this fistula, according to the extent to which you test it.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeat the application of the cautery inside until those corrupted parts are burned, once or twice or three times, according to your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And beware of burning the nerves and veins; or if the fistula leads to the body of the bladder or to the intestines, then be careful around all those areas; and do not perform this unless the fistula is in a fleshy area and you think it is not penetrating deeper.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Then treat the area until it is healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the area is sealed and the materials are separated from it, and remain that way for a long time, then know that it is completely cured.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the materials are not removed from it, then know that it is penetrating or into the marrow of the corrupted bone, or this comes from those causes which will bring a recurrence in its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Capitol .xxxvii.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	Of the cauterization of the hemorrhoids.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When pain in the hemorrhoids occurs due to cold or excessive wind (gas), and because of this, the patient's condition is worsened, then it is necessary to cauterize that area over the hemorrhoids with a cautery, applying a nail-shaped cautery specifically to each hemorrhoid.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And strongly cauterize them with a slight space between each one, so that three linear cauteries will form, and thus they will be more effective in healing.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On the cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When you encounter weakness and softening of the bladder due to cold and moisture such that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize that area slightly above the bladder where the pubic hairs begin. Cauterize with one cautery on the right side and another on the left side of it.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the number of fingers of the foot; and cauterize that area with a cautery on the lower part of the back, or with two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And let the cautery be like a clamp as it is processed. 
Capitol .xxxix.	Capitol .xxxix.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Of the cauterization of the thigh.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When cold and humidity come to the thigh, and because of this, intercourse is prohibited, and the menstrual cycle of the individual is corrupted, and the provocation of menstruation is delayed, and pain occurs due to the onset of menstruation, then it is necessary that the area be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, just as we have said in the cautery of the bladder; and with a cautery on the most affected side of the thighs, or with two cauteries, and let the cautery be cloven.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter XL.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When cold and moist humors are poured into the area of the ankle and cause it to dislocate from its proper place, a sign of this is that one leg appears lengthened compared to the other when they are put side by side.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the area of the dislocation is found where there is pain.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then it is necessary to cauterize the patient on the area of the ankle with a circular cautery, after you have marked the area by feeling around the joint as it is rotated, so that the joint falls in the center of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And it is the cautery with which you proceed in the form of cauterization of the stomach. 
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize that area with three large olive wood cauteries.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And let the cautery be done according to the quantity of the spiciness of the entire chain; and then care for that which has been healed.
Capitol .xli.	Capitol .xli.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	Of the cautery of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain comes to the upper part of the body and is caused by cold and moisture, the patient is treated with what we have said and does not agree [likely meaning 'does not respond'], as this is outdated. Now you must relieve the patient of thick humors with foul pills or artificial pills or similar; then cauterize that area.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the method of cautery in this case is according to two methods: either cautery with burning medicines, or cautery with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	Follows according to two scientific methods, of which one is that you cauterize that area on the broad part with three triangular cauteries in this form; and make those with good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And let the space that is between each cautery be the size of a finger's thickness, and if the cautery is olive or grain-shaped.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	And sometimes the cautery is placed over the exact spot on top of the ankle, so there are four cauterizations.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, cauterize with the circle which precedes the form in the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle, where the circular area should be contained and burn the entirety of the tendon.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the method of cautery in surgery when pain is attached to the ankle and does not extend into the thigh.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	And if the pain extends into the thigh, then apply cautery at two points on the thigh over the area where you find the patient's pain is located; and with one cautery on the calf, about four fingers away from the outer part.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cautery is knife-shaped, then the depth of the cautery should be according to the degree of severity of the condition.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the patient indicates that the pain extends to the area near the toes of the foot, then apply cautery at that spot where they indicate, using a cautery with three points or four or more if needed for that area.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the patient indicates that the pain is from the knee towards the thigh, then apply cautery at that spot using a knife-shaped cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And be careful in any cautery that you do not use the cautery so intensely that you burn nerves or large arteries, and by doing so, cause harm or contraction to the patient.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have seen some of those who cauterized on the ankle and concluded with the cauterization, and the hot swelling inflated until it reached the foot, and the heat perforated and corrupted the entire foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And then administer a strong solution for the stomach, and after that, death. 
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts at once, cauterize each one according to this method.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise ones also spoke about the cauterization of the aforementioned cautery, whose method is as follows: make a circular piece of iron with its circumference being half a palm; and let its hole be according to the thickness of a date seed or somewhat smaller.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And within that circle, let there be another third [circle]; and the space between them should be the quantity of a walnut; and those circles should be opened on two sides; and the length of those rods should be one or two walnuts; and make on those iron edges properly arranged in the circles; and this is its form:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Then it should be heated in the fire until it turns red and sparks, and then place it on the affected part of the ankle, with the patient lying on their side.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And thus, cauterize that area with three round cauteries at once.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then leave it for three days; then apply a plaster to that area and keep the wound open for several days; and then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	But of the good cauteries to him who has suffered them, and find with that the place of it.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	And using a cautery with adhering medicines, you should make two circles having an armula perforated in which they say the keyhole of the iron door; let the length of the walls be in their nature two nuts or keys whichever.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space which is between each of the size of a finger's thickness; and they are opened below and above, and they contain each other in this manner:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And then place your hand over the part of the ankle while the patient lies on their side, and press your hand firmly on that area; and then take warm water and pour it between two circles, and ensure that the temperature is gradually increased near the fire little by little, and keep this up for about an hour, enduring the biting sensation and adjustment from it — for that remedy bites as if it were fire — until the burning subsides.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then lift your hand with the instrument and clean the entire ankle with warm water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then let it rest for three days and place your hand on that area until the blackness from the inflammation is reduced, and keep this up for several more days, and pus will flow out; this is the final stage of healing.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that area with ointments until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain extends to the thigh or the abdomen, apply the same treatment as was done for the ankle, ensuring it contains water accordingly.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the method of hot water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the refinement of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Take alkali and unextinguished lime in equal parts, grind them together, and place them in a new bowl, one part of which should have a small hole pierced through it, according to the amount that will fit inside.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And place the bottom of the bowl over another inverted bowl, and pour warm water over the alkali and quicklime until it covers them by one finger's depth. Then compress them with your hand using good pressure, allowing the sharp water that drips down to enter the pierced part into the inverted bowl.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then collect all that water and pour it over more quicklime and new alkali, because this will result in a strongly acidic solution, which is used in many medical procedures and for cauterizing other parts of the body, as this operation involves fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And for some medicines with which a broad cauterization is performed, such as tezizic and mel anacrat mixed together, along with lime and soap that are also mixed.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Gaulia recounts an operation and cure used by an ancient person to treat ankle pain and sciatica, and greatly praises its effectiveness, saying that no other cure is necessary, and that it heals permanently as he describes, for he strongly recommends immersing the affected area in a bath and thus one is free of it.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it is that green fennel should be taken, and if green fennel cannot be found, fresh figs should be taken; and these should be crushed with a little grease and placed on the ankle where there is pain, or on the thigh, or on the chest, and then bandaged.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And it should be left on for the duration of three hours or for the amount of time that the patient feels relief from the application.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	Then place that in a bath and when the patient's body is warmed, immerse them in the soil, for the pain will cease and be healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that it is not necessary for anyone to use cautery with these medicines except near the evacuation of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	But Escorides says that when the venous vein is cauterized with goat's milk, it greatly benefits the patient. And here is how to apply the cautery: take wool and soak it in old oil, then place it between the toes of the foot and on the sole.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	Then take dried goat's milk, and ignite it with fire until it turns into charcoal. Then place it on the wool and burn it until it is spread out.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And then repeat this, and do not stop doing this until the feeling of the bite reaches the ankle and relieves the pain. 
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this method of cautery is called cow-cautery. 
Capitol .xlii.	Capitol .xlii.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	From the cauterization of foot pain.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cautery is only used in this single condition which is caused by the effusion of cold matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, after the evacuation of the patient with medicinal pills and similar ones, which are applied on the back where the pain is, three lines should be made according to the width of it, and then mark them with ten points in each line or more, depending on the tolerance of the patient and their strength.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And the cautery should be performed with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauteries using a median claw-shaped cautery in the following manner:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XLIII.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On the use of cautery at the onset of rheumatism.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	This disease often appears in small children; and the sign of its onset in children is that it affects their structure, causing difficulty in elevation and movement.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And you will find that the lower vertebrae of the back and the knots begin to protrude over the other vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And so when you see this and want to prevent it, then cauterize that area with a circular cautery according to this form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	And take the cautery over all parts of the vertebra evenly.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you wish, cauterize around the circumference of the vertebra with a pointed cautery, making two or three lines.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And let the points be close to each other.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	Then treat the area until it heals using what we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	But beware that cautery should not be applied to swelling caused by nerve spasms.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On the cauterization of gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout properly by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And thus when gout caused by cold is treated with a method of cure and the pains are not relieved, then they are relieved by cautery.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And it is that you cauterize that area near the evacuation in the region of the foot joint with several cauteries.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And it is an olive-shaped cautery, which has this form:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pain rises into the fingers or other joints, and this often happens, then cauterize each finger with three or four cauteries from all sides using this olive-shaped cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if more cauteries than these are necessary for you, then cauterize accordingly, but do not press your hand too hard with the cautery beforehand; only apply it around the area of the wound as needed.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pain rises into the finger and the joint, then apply the cautery that we have described in its chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pain is in the muscles only and it is called rheumatism, then puncture around the circumference of the affected area as it spreads, puncturing along those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pain remains in the toes, then puncture around the circumference of the affected area on each toe and on the palm of the hand. 
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pains approach after some days in the joints or muscles, then cauterize them all around with the instruments.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And you do not evacuate the patient through proper regimen and reception of medicines, for if a good regimen is followed and phlegm is evacuated with this cautery, they will be healed, God helping.
Capitol .xlv.	Capitol .xlv.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	Of cautery of ruptures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When there is swelling in the knees and pushing of the intestines before the hernia to the genital area, and this begins to happen soon, then you must order the patient to leave their food on that day and use laxatives so that the swelling descends from their abdomen.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	Then guide the patient between your hands on their back, and command them to keep their belly inside so that nothing is thrown out or the hernia or intestines appear.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	Then return and with your hands, carefully attempt to repair the rupture over the bone of the pelvis, marking the end which should resemble half a circle at the upper divided parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then prepare the cautery, which has the following form:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	until it becomes red hot and gives off sparks.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	Then place the cautery on that mark with your hand, holding the cautery straight, and insert it until you reach the bone of the heel within the middle of the joint; and repeat with that another time if in the first attempt you have not reached the bone.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And carefully observe the condition of the intestine during your cautery, so that you do not burn it, thus causing death or another great harm to the patient.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your operation is not successful.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And it is necessary that the cautery for children be delicate according to their size and proportion.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	Then treat the area of the cautery for three days with ointment until the burn scar is healed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then treat that area with other ointments until it is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient should lie on their back for forty days until the area and the wound are fully healed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And it is necessary to control the patient's diet according to the length of their treatment time, which reduces their stomach intake, and ensures that the intestine does not come out due to the effort of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And then when it is time to lift [the patient] after about forty days, administer a properly prepared remedy, and let them take that for another forty days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And let them be reduced in labor and the consumption of food and drink, and from loud voices, for when they use this regimen of complete recovery, they will be healed.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And I will describe the treatment of ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and at the beginning, if you want them not to heal on their own, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size, and let what is protruding from the hernia be removed as much as one-third of it; then treat that as we have said, without adjusting [the protrusion].
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And some of the earlier [physicians] have said that a rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, since it is marked out with a probe:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	and it is a paused line that you place across the width at the highest part of the rupture, and another line above it; then place your hand with a claw cautery, but the first cautery should be lighter and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Capitol .xlvi.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Of cautery for扭伤。(这段翻译似乎出现了错误，让我重新组织一下这句话的翻译。)
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain occurs in the upper limbs due to a blow or impact and that pain persists for a long time and does not improve with medical treatment, then you must cauterize using a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the cautery should be applied to the entire limb according to its size and smallness, strength and frailty, and the location of the twist and pain.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Therefore, if it is healed by the first cautery, that is good; and if not, then apply the cautery again. For such pains are usually punctured from one limb to another near the area of pain, so you must continue using the cautery until the patient is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	On the cautery of leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Some lepers see great benefit from being treated with cautery, especially if the type of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of blood and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And when you wish to cauterize the affected area, consider if the leprosy is widespread and can be cured with what we have said in the division and does not spread further, and you fear that the corruption will encompass the entire body and all of its composition, then cauterize on the head with five cauteries: one at the middle of the head, another slightly below it on the forehead at the end of the hair; two on both temples; and one behind, on the nape or neck.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And place your hand with the cautery slightly inside to press on the bone a little pressure, and from there displace the scales so that the expiration of thick vapors is relieved from them; and cauterize over the bladder as needed.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if leprosy has already spread over the patient and appears clearly, then you must cauterize that area using those cauteries which we mentioned earlier; with a cautery on the tip of the nose, and two cauteries on both cheeks, and two cauteries on two vertebrae of the neck, and six cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and one large one on the vertebrae near the hip, and one on the ribs, and two on the elbows, and one on each elbow, and two on the knees, and one on each knee, and two on the ankles, and one on each ankle, and two on the toes, and one on each toe; cauterize that over all the joints of his fingers and feet, and on each heel of his feet, and on the joints of his fingers.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And be careful of the nerves that are on the heel so as not to burn those.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And sometimes it is cauterized with one cautery on the bone of the palate and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more you apply cauteries, the more beneficial and effective it is; and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery, just as they do not feel it on their skin, because their body is already numb.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And it is necessary that the cauteries be large or few according to the limbs and joints, as is prescribed by the specifics of the instruments. 
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the cautery with barley flour cooked with honey and apply other treatments until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	It seems like you've provided a section or chapter indicator, likely from an older text, but have not included a full sentence or paragraph to translate. The indicator ".xlviii." translates to "48" in Roman numerals, suggesting this is the 48th chapter or section of whatever work you are referencing.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Of cautery for stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When any member is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, but it does not heal, then you must cauterize that numbed member with cauteries according to the size of the member or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let your cautery enter the incision of the cord a little.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then treat that area with ointment until it heals.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And sometimes a stupor (numbness) that affects the hands and feet, and the vertebrae of the back, is cauterized to address the flow of nerves that affect that member, and the stupor is reduced.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	But do not presume on this unless one is knowledgeable in the anatomy of the members and the distribution of the nerves that move throughout the body.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLIX.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On the cauterization of albaras that are malignant.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When albaras is old and does not respond to any of the medicinal ointments, then you must cauterize that area with a cautery slightly according to the amount of the protrusion until the whiteness and color are reduced, and its color changes.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with flour of ashes and lentils mixed with anointed oil and leaves of arnica, and with the blood of a pigeon or the blood of a swan, each being one part and all mixed together, then apply a cloth and place it over the area until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	It seems like you've provided a section marker or title, "Capitul .l." which likely means "Chapter I" or "Chapter 1". If you have text following this chapter marker that needs translation or explanation, please provide it, and I will be happy to assist!
De cauterizacio de cranc.	This phrase "De cauterizacio de cranc" can be translated into English as:
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer begins and you wish to remove it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery around it just as it appears.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle; but I do not agree with this, for I fear that it may become ulcerated, and I have seen this happen several times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is better that it be cauterized around it in a circle as we have said, or with multiple cauteries.
Capitol .li.	Chapter II.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	On the cauterization of hernias.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When some hernia is delayed in maturation, and this is due to an excess of moisture or the condition of the patient, who is old and decrepit, with little blood, or because of the season, and you wish to hasten the maturation of the hernia; then cauterize around it with multiple small puncturing cauteries; and afterwards leave it so that it may hasten in maturation.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	And if you wish to make a perforation with a cautery, then ignite the cautery which has this shape: and place it in the appropriate location within where the vein will be penetrated.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery in that place where it is necessary leaves [the area], so that the arm's body be relieved; and then treat that internal [issue] which needs to be healed.
Capitol .lii.	Capitol .lii.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	From the cautery of corrosives.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrosive is corruption moving within the member, which corrupts it just as fire consumes dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you find that corrosive agent in a place which has suffered from cautery with fire, then you apply a few small, and large clavus cauterizations according to what is suitable for that place where the corrosion is. 
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then cauterize it all around until you eliminate all the corrosion and leave no cause for it to return.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And then leave it for three days, and place over the cauterized areas a dressing saturated with oil mixed until all the scars are removed and all the corruption is eliminated.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And then treat it with flesh-generating ointments.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	But if after three days the flesh grows healthy with no corruption, that is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on the areas that are rotten and corrupted.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And corrosive areas should be treated several times with sharp medicines, for those serve as an alternative to cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, cauterization with fire is a more reliable method.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already described the treatment with sharp medicines in the section, so use that method when you need to apply it.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter LIII.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	Of the cautery of nails and other similar things.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Apply cautery to the areas around the foot that is affected by a condition called "clau," which is caused by a deep and large insertion that displaces the foot. The cautery in these cases can be performed in two ways: with fire and with hot water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	The cautery with fire involves heating the concave cautery instrument, similar to a small wheel, which should be made of iron according to the size that encompasses the entire nail, and it should have fine edges.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	Then place that heated instrument on the nail, and then rotate your hand with the cautery around the circumference of the nail until the cautery reaches the depth of the nail.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And leave it for three days until it begins to discharge pus.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	Then apply a poultice made with crushed wild mallows and salt to it, and leave the poultice on it for one night, as this will help root it out from its foundations.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with an ointment made from generative flesh until it is healed. 
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it does not resolve, and you frequently encounter issues on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, then you must administer with those cauteries using water. Take a quill made of reed or iron or a bird feather, and place that over the claw; and then pour into the quill some hot water in small quantity, and hold your hand, and you rotate that by pressing it with your hand all around, and press the edge of the quill to the root of the claw; the hot water will find its way through the pores at the base of the claw. The patient should endure the burning sensation from the hot water for an hour, and then remove it, as the claw along with its roots will be eradicated.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And in this way, with these methods one by one applied until they cover all those areas within the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And then treat those pus that the roots of the claws have eradicated with these ointments which cause the flesh to regenerate.
Capitol .liiii.	Capitol .liii.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	From the text provided and its structure, which resembles medieval medical Latin with influences from other Romance languages, here is a translation of the given line:
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When there is a tremor due to cold in the nerves or by cold fever or for another similar reason, then it is necessary that you cauterize those areas with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra with one cautery; and with cauteries on their feet and over their stomach, using olive-cauteries.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the trembling of the patient subsides and hastens the healing of the cold illness.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 5.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	On the cauterization of various accidents to the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When on the body there are eruptions and pustules that have burst, which are formed from thick corrupted materials; therefore, at the beginning when they appear, it is necessary to cauterize over each head of the fistula with a fine cautery using myrtle twigs, the end of which is spread out by fire; or with long pieces of resin; or with a lens-shaped cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And sometimes the cautery is also applied at the beginning of its expulsion in this manner; and it is not believed to be harmful, and the excess is disrupted by doing this, and it heals from these actions.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	But however it must be done near evacuation with bloodletting.
Capitol lvi.	Capitol lvi.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Of cautery for accidental blood flow due to artery incision.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Watchful troops should divert the flow of an artery that is cut, either from the place where it comes out or from the beginning of abscesses or cautery of the limb, and similar situations, and it is difficult to remain in such a state. 
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore, when this happens to someone, then you should plug the artery opening with your hand, and place your finger over it so that you tightly press on those spots intermittently until the blood flow stops, keeping your finger there so that it does not come out.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then place the small and large olive-shaped cautery irons in the fire several times, and blow on them until they are well heated.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	Then take one of those, either small or large, according to the location and the severity of the wound where the artery is ruptured, place the cautery over that vein quickly after you have removed your finger, and hold the cautery until it burns and constricts the blood flow.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you remove your finger and withdraw the cautery, then take another heated cautery from those which are prepared in the fire, and continue to apply them one after the other until the blood flow is restrained.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And be careful not to burn the nerves that are here, and ensure that no other harm comes to the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And you should know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to stop the bleeding in those cases except by one of four methods: either with a cautery as we have mentioned, or through extraction if it has not been done, because when it is done, the ends of the veins are burned and the blood flow is restricted; or binding with pitch or strong binding material; or placing medicines on it that have the power to constrict the blood; and they should be compressed with a cushion using appropriate constriction.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	And he who administers appropriate constriction to it with binding and strong pressure using cloths or through the placement of burning and similar causes, should not apply this method hastily but gradually.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	But if this happens to someone and the doctor is not present nor any medicine, then apply pressure with your index finger on the opening of that vein as we have said, and understand that you must exert strong constriction from within so that the blood stops at the main part of the wound; and do not remove your finger from the artery; and pour cold water with great chill over the artery until the blood is congealed and thickened; and then proceed to where cauterization or medicine is necessary.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begin the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	About incision and puncture and cupping and bloodletting and plagues and their similarities.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter about all diseases in which cautery with fire is appropriate and with medicinal combustion, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for them along with the forms of the cauterizations; and I have ordered the chapters from the highest part of the head down to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And I will proceed in this chapter in the same manner, so that the reader may be relieved regarding what they have asked about.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before I begin this, son, it is necessary that you understand that in this chapter there is a continuation of what is in the first chapter on cautery.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And for this reason, great caution is required, because in the operations described in this chapter, many times bloodletting, which involves blood that sustains life, must be performed through venesection or incision on an abscess, or the removal of foreign objects, or the purification of a plague, or the extraction of an arrowhead, or the removal of stones and their likes.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And with all of those [symptoms], there accompanies fear and trembling, and in most cases, death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that this should not happen to you in which there is danger, because sometimes your ways as a person can be mixed with the ways of diseases. 
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And among them are some who will go with their illness and death is near for them, and this due to the intensity of what they find in their illness, and because of the length of their illness, and with the illness comes fear which signifies death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And of those is the one who gives you his possessions and says, you hoping with that person for health, and their illness is destructive.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore you should not consent to that which comes to you in this manner; and your caution should be greater than covetousness and greed; and do not assume any cause about this unless based on certain knowledge that confirms what you are doing, and for which you will receive commendable success.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And it is used in the treatment of all your illnesses for prognosis and indication of that which is converted into health, for in this you find assistance in gaining fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	O, children, may God inspire His understanding in you and not remove direction and protection from you, for this is in His hands.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have ordered this chapter distinctly by sections following the chapter on cauteries, for the treatment from head to foot, so that what you seek and need may be made easier for you.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	On the treatment of water that is contained in the heads of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this illness often occurs due to childbirth and when the wet nurse tightly binds the child's head with too much force.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And sometimes for hidden reasons which are not known.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	And I have only seen this disease in children; and in all those whom I saw it led to death, and thus it appears to me as a forsaken work in them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and the head of this child was so enlarged that he could not bear it due to the size of his head, and the humidity increased until it caused death.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this humidity is either added between the skin and the bone, or it is added over the bone on the scalp.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	For the operation on that area where the humidity is between the skin and the bone and the abscess is small, you must make an incision in the middle of the head with a cut横向的长度应该是两指宽以便让液体流出，这就是所谓的"spatum"的形式。
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And therefore, if the humidity is increased more and the abscess is larger, then here are two incisions according to this method:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the humidity is near the bone, a sign of it is that you see the corners of the head open from all sides and water is squeezed when you press that area with your hand on the inner parts and this was not previously noticed by you. 
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	You must split in the middle of the head with three incisions according to this manner:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And then extract all the moisture from the incision; and then secure the incisions with cloths and bandages; and then cover it with wine and oil until the fifth day, and then remove the binding and care for the wound with lint and ointments, and bind the head evenly; and feed the patient with dry food of little moisture until the member is strengthened and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another method of incision, where you consider the location and magnitude of the abscess and the collection of water, for sometimes it is more prominent in the occiput, or in the front part, or on the right side, or on the left side; and thus pay attention with the incision to where the abscess and the accumulation of water appear, and do this according to what is best possible for you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And be careful not to cut the artery, which could cause a flow of blood and lead to the patient's death due to that blood loss and evacuation of moisture.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter II.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Of the incision of the arteries that are near the ears, called helix.
Capitol segon.	Second chapter.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When catarrhs or rheums occur in the eyes or feet, and this has been ongoing for a long time, and you do not see improvement with medical treatments, then the final cure in such cases is to begin with those two arteries. 
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And thus it is necessary that when you want to incise those where the patient shaves their head, and then rub the area with a coarse cloth so that the arteries appear, and then tightly bind the neck of the patient with some cloth; and then consider where the vein pulses; and the places of each are over the areas which are near the ears being pressed, and thus they are hidden in some men.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then mark over the artery with a probe, and then cut each one with a sharp spatula, making an incision that goes deep into the bone, and this is done according to the width of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you wish, insert the spatula beneath the artery and break it at the points above the incisions.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And the length of the incision should be about two fingers joined together, for when any vein is cut, blood escapes with a pulsating flow, which spurts out frequently.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	But if the artery does not appear at first, then you must measure from the ear a distance of three fingers, and then mark it with a probe, and go deep into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And the amount of blood that should be let is an ounce, and it should not be more or less, and all of this depends on the amount that appears based on the strength of the patient and the fullness of their artery.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then examine the wound, and if any piece of matter remains on the bone causing pain, then cut out that part so it does not lead to an abscess.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen the wound with poultices and lint made of linen, and then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	It seems like you've provided a section heading that might be from an old text or manuscript, specifically "Capitul .iii.", which likely means "Chapter III". If you have more content following this header or need further assistance with translation or interpretation of the text, please provide it, and I'll be happy to help!
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	On the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When there are old or sharp accidents due to excessive moisture and qualities in the temporal veins, or if the condition is extremely severe and similar to these, and it has not been treated by the usual methods of medical cure, then we resort to extracting the arteries in the temples for these illnesses, or cauterizing them as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the method of the operation and extraction is that the patient should shave the hairs which are on the temples; and identify the visible artery in the temple where it is shown to you by its pulse, and it is hidden except in a few people due to the intensity of cold.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden from you, then the patient's neck should be stretched with some cloth; and then warm the area with a coarse cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until the artery appears clearly to you.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And now you take the spatula, which has the following form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you carefully cut through the tissue with that spatula until you reach the artery; and then you incise and extract it from the superior parts until you remove it from the tissue and expose it from the layers that cover it entirely.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	If the artery is delicate, then wrap that with the tip of an ounce, and then divide from that a part according to the amount by which the extremities are stretched out or contracted, and there will be no flow of blood, for if they are not divided, the blood will not rise properly.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	Then evacuate one to three ounces of blood.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, then you must tie it in two places with a strong double thread of wool or with long cords, and do not allow putrefaction before the wound heals and the flow of blood stops.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	Then cut away the excess that is between two ligaments; do this at that time or shortly after.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize that area with a cautery near the bone using a knife-shaped cautery before the extremities are cut, and it will remain in place as the same procedure.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	It is better to perform this procedure when the patient does not have a fever or is of a hot temperament; for cautery is one of those causes that helps dry out excess moisture, and thus it is more beneficial in treatment.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And it is then necessary to extract the arteries that fill the area of old wound, and they should be placed on decently prepared ashes, and then treated with dry medicines that cause flesh to grow and with poultices until it is healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while you are working another time blood flows from the artery, then you should take care to stop that bleeding, either with a cautery or by filling the area with cloth, and press your hand inside until the bleeding is stopped.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if the cause of those [issues] is not present, then place your finger on the area until the blood is congealed, and wash the area with very cold water until the sharp pain subsides, and apply pressure as needed.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And the lighter method for extracting an artery is to cauterize the vein with this cautery having two blades, since you have marked the two spots with a probe, and then place them, ignite them, until they reach the bone and divide the vein into two places, so that what is between the ends of it is extended, because they are not fully consolidated by this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And the sharpness of the two blades should be similar.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, if it is less sharp than two knives are better, for if they are as sharp as two knives close to each cut, and do not tear the flesh with speed.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, since there is some swelling in those areas, heat from fire is applied to them and the flesh is cut lightly.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better than all other works and lighter.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And let the space which is between two knives be the thickness of a finger.
Capitol quart.	Chapter four.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	On the treatment of acute and acidic tears in the eyes.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When those tears are acidic, and the source of these veins that are above the head's forehead is inflamed, and you do not find any cause for medical treatment in this regard, and sometimes the patient's face turns red and they feel a crawling sensation on their forehead as if it were ants crawling, and their eyes become weakened to such an extent that their eyelashes are barely noticeable, and the eyelids are irritated by the acidity of the tears, ancient bitter remedies were used in the treatment of such conditions, and I will not name that treatment without reason.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And you command the patient to remove the hairs that are on their forehead, and then make three incisions equally spaced along the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the incision is about two fingers: the first incision should be equally distant from the length of the nose at the middle of the forehead, the second according to the length a little beyond the movement of the tear ducts which are in the lacrimal area, and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And be careful with the beginning of the arteries which are on both sides, and extend your hand along the continuation of both jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of each incision is the quantity of three fingers put together.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a piece of sponge prepared or dry cloths with which you dry the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then insert the spatula with two sharp ends, of which this is the form of the incision:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	The text appears to be a mix of Latin and Romance languages. Here is my attempt at translating the provided line:
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then stretch this spatula and insert it into the first incision again with another instrument which is called a cutter, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And place the sharp side of that to separate the adjacent flesh from the tendon, and the other side against the bone, and push it in until you reach the middle fissure, and with that cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	And continue the incision to this part of the tendon, and then do this in the middle fissure between another fissure.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And when an equal amount of blood flows out, press the areas where the clotted blood is located.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then place in each fissure some old cat's wool, and put on those powders mixed with wine and oil and vinegar, and ensure that it does not cause a harmful inflammation.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day, remove the bandage and administer a large infusion of warm or tepid water, and then treat it with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil and other ingredients until the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	Capitol .v.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	For the given text:
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When acute and continuous diarrhea occurs in someone, and the patient’s veins become exhausted somewhat, and their eyesight is weakened, and their eyelids are ulcerated with hair loss, and there is a sharp pain at the vertex of the head followed by sneezing, then you should know from these symptoms that the materials and purgings do not come but from small veins within the affected areas.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure for this is as follows: command the patient to shave their forehead, and then make an incision in that area, creating a small slit at the midpoint of the forehead (and begin the cut from the left temple towards the right temple; this incision should be into the bone; extend your hand beyond the swollen areas near the temples which are enlarged due to chewing), until the bone is exposed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry all the blood with a sponge or a dry cloth, and then pack between the two edges of the slit with old wool or cloths.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Then apply powdered material soaked in wine and oil on top to prevent inflammation and infection.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you loosen that and see that the abscess has already diminished, then it is necessary to rub the bone where new flesh begins to grow, and treat it with a drying regimen which makes the flesh grow, just as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix them together, and from these make a plaster and apply it to those areas where the natural flesh grows.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	For the given sentence:
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	Every cause that affects the ears is of one of four types: either it is mineral stone or something resembling stone, such as iron and glass; or it is from plants, such as rue or bean; or it is caused by fluxes, such as water and sour wine and things similar to them; or some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And so when a stone enters the ear or another similar cause of those that do not fit nor grow in the ear, and expose the ear to sunlight, and if you remove the stone, then distill some viola oil or sizami into it, and then administer its extract, and induce sneezing with conditions, and plug the nostrils before the act of sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	Then place some pieces of cloth or wool around the ear's opening, and stretch the ear towards the upper parts, for it is often plugged by these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not plugged, then administer the extract using an instrument called the gesti epicicarios subtil, which has the following form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is plugged by the instrument, that is good; and if not, then administer the extract using a fine needle of double duplication.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And if it is not caused by that, then make a tube from wire and insert the end of the tube into the ear canal, and seal around the tube with wax and softened oil so that only the tube remains open. 
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then extract with your breath with strong suction, because troops of worms like those we have recounted.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	And if it is not treated in this manner, then take some alum or a vessel that is used to catch birds with a small amount of them, and place that at the end of the ray, and then wrap around that spot properly placed. 
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then gently insert it into the ear canal, and then dry the ear of its moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And therefore, if it is not cured by all the causes we have mentioned, then you should consider slicing it before it turns into an abscess or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the method of slicing it is that you first let blood from the patient’s saphenous vein according to the virtue and method suitable for them, then make a cut between your fingers and turn the ear upwards, and finally make a small incision at the root of the ear to remove the pus from the compressed area.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And let the incision be of a crescent shape until you reach the stone, and once the stone is found, remove it if possible using appropriate instruments; then quickly close the incision, and care for it until it is healed.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause affecting the ear is one of the growths that have grown and become inflamed, then administer its treatment and extraction; but if it does not respond to this approach, then take a thin, subtle spatula in the following manner:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	And administer with that the extraction of the object which has fallen into the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not perform this when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear. Place it in small pieces and then extract them with tweezers or a subtle gesture, or with an incision as we have said, for the extraction is easier this way.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	However, when water has entered the ear, the patient should begin with a sneeze induced by some irritant, and fill their ear with some old cloth. Jump over the ear in which the water is trapped; if it is expelled this way, that's good. If not, take thin pieces of stone about the length of a finger, heat them slightly over fire, and have the patient insert one of these into the passage of their ear. They should jump slightly on that side and strike the stone inside the ear with another stone to aid in its expulsion.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Therefore, do not stop this procedure until all the water has been completely expelled.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And already the water is sprinkled such that you take paper or cotton, and put one end of it in the ear and extend the other end with fire until its middle part is burned.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And then put another syringe and do this as many times until all the water is extracted, and strain that with a tube as was said above about the stone extractor.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	Here is the translation of the given sentence line by line into English:
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	And in the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, when you treat it with what we have said in the division and in the treatment of distillations and do not complete your cure, then you must look at the ear to the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And therefore if any sign of worms appears here, then extract them with gestures or with subtle probes; but if no cause appears, then take a tube that is narrow at one end and wide at the other, which has this form:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the fine extremity into the ear according to the amount that the patient can endure; and then suck with it strongly, and do this several times until all the worms are expelled.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	And if you do not obey the instruction, then plug and close the cannula circuit with wax as we have said; then administer distillations which have already proven effective in the treatment of worms, and you will find this in the treatise on distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let your effusion be with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear using this instrument, which has the following form:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make it of silver or brass, leave it straight, with a small tube in it, and a plate on top.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And thus it should be designed to fit into the opening of the cannula container where it will be necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the rod and wrap the end of it properly with a cloth, then pour oil into the concavity of the ear or juice from some herb, or any such medicine into the cannula — which is in the ear — and then insert the rod with the cloth on top and press gently with your hand to force the oil into the concavity of the ear until the patient feels the oil inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And that which is inserted into the ear should already be slightly warmed with fire.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And be careful that the substance you will instill in the ear is not too cold, for medicines for the ear do not tolerate that.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the treatment of ear obstruction.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Sometimes, some children are born with unperforated ear drums from their mothers, and this can also happen to adults, where obstruction occurs in the ear canal due to plaque or soft flesh growing there. This obstruction sometimes happens at the entrance of the ear canal without affecting hearing, and at other times it is on the outer parts.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which occurs at the entrance of it, without affecting hearing, is often in a more difficult condition to heal.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in the case where it affects hearing, you must expose the patient's ear to the sun and examine it closely.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then if swelling appears, open it with a fine scalpel which has this shape:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the extremity of it in which the width is small, one part being sharp and the other not; and the spatula be of two sides to prevent injury to the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And therefore, if the obstruction is due to flesh grown in the ear or in the flesh of it, then take that with fine needles and cut into it easily so that all the flesh may be removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if there is obstruction in the ear canal, then take a fine linen cloth and warm it slightly over fire, and then place it inside the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And thus if you find that the patient breathes with ease using this method, it indicates that the difficulty in breathing is easily alleviated by gravity; be careful not to harm the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then place in the ear a piece of cloth according to the size of the width of the tube which you have wrapped with Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are certain of the consolidation of the wound; or take some wax, soften it in rose water and sprinkle ground powder over it and use it; and if you find that the ear is already abscessed, then you must remove the wax and replace it with another piece of wax which you will wrap in cerot made with crushed oil, until the abscess begins to heal; and continue to treat it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	But if there is a flow of blood, then soak a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use another treatment that stops the flow of blood, which is described in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Capitol .viii.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	For the treatment of athetosis which occurs in the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Atnezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore, you must hold those with tenaculum or with forceps, and divide those with a knife from their roots, and then place your hand over the areas that have been stitched.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	And if pain with a flow of blood occurs, then you should cauterize those areas with a subtle round cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is performed near the incisions and fresh wounds when there remains any cause of the veins' bleeding; and when they are cauterized with fire, those veins are burned and do not bleed again.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment for swelling that occurs in the eyelids of the eyes.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Fresh swellings that appear in the eyelids of the eyes, which resemble swelling in their strength and hardness, and therefore this swelling is called by that name.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an accumulation of thick moisture on the eyelid, both below and above.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the procedure for it is to consider whether the swelling is occurring in such a way that it appears from the eyelid and is soft all around; and the cause of it is slight.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore, make an incision over it along its width, and then squeeze it all around to facilitate its draining until it dries out, and then suspend it with an ounce and cut it off.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if you are not prepared at the beginning to penetrate the eyelid with an incision little by little, then this should not be a cause for concern.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the wound is large, then you adjust it with stitches; and care for the inside so that it heals.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, you will not suffer harm from it because the heat of it restores and reattaches that area.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the swelling is declining inside the area within the eyelid, you should open the eyelid and suspend the swelling with an ointment, which you apply at the beginning, and press it on all sides; and if the eyelid is elongated at the start, this does not matter in any way.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	Then at the beginning, wash the wound with salt water; and treat the area to promote healing until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	On the treatment around the upper eyelid of the eye.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Axcirnath is a gray substance that forms in the tissues of the upper eyelid, and it mostly affects children, worsening their eyes and often leading to catarrh; and they cannot look at the brightness of the sun because tears accumulate due to this condition.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And therefore you often find them lying on their faces all the time, and they sleep with their faces down; and so at the eyelids of their eyes, the eyebrows are moist, which have already been covered by swelling, and an appearance of cataract is evident in the eye; and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel a hardness inside them.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And some method of operation is such that the patient places their head on your lap, and then cover both with a cloth and make it warm, and create a circle according to the amount which contains arthernach from all sides, and then place one on top of the other and press with your fingers evenly so that arthernach is aggregated in the middle of the circle, and then introduce moisture in the center with a spatula inserted through a slit for its width, and the slit should not be larger than the one made in flaubotomy.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	And in the first stage, you must cut through the entire cord until you reach the kneecap, because in most dispositions, you should process the kneecap by splitting according to the form of white grease.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Therefore, take out those with cloths in which you have wrapped between the fingers of your hands on the outer parts and roll between your right and left hand until it is dispersed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be careful not to insert it into the crack so that with the spatula you do not reach the bone and avoid that.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	And if the artery does not appear to you at the beginning of the fissure, then place in the fissure a small piece with which the artery can protrude; and then extract it as we have said; and then soak cloths in wine and agreeable water and place them over the area and press them with powder.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And thus, those who apply salt and place it in the cavity of the裂痕，以便吸收那里的湿气。
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that inside so it may be healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	And if you encounter an abscess in that area, then treat it with soft plasters until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	On methods of applying to the stomach.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When in the eyelids of the eyes, natural hairs grow in abundance and become old, these can harm the eye and lead to various ailments such as persistent tears and softening of the eyelids and conjunctiva, which can eventually cause destruction of the eye known as entropion. This condition is treated in four ways: by cauterization with fire; by using sharp medicine as mentioned before in the chapter on cauteries; by creating an atactini through incision and suturing; or by using cannulas, as I will explain.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And therefore, you must hold the head of the patient in your hand; then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand. If it turns easily, that is good; if not, insert a needle into the part where the pus lies beneath the eyelid and guide the needle with the thread above it, close to the margin of the eyelid where the hairs grow, near the hairs. Pull the thread towards you with the eyelid, and turn it back in place.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then introduce a probe between the inner part of the eyelid and adjust the hairs with an instrument that directs the tears from the larger tear duct into the smaller one; and then extract the pus and place on the eyelid small dust of cotton or cloth, and then sew over the eyelid with thread, and thus it should be as shown in the figure of a myrtle leaf.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, the figure should be according to the amount of elevation of the eyelid, for this varies among individuals, as some require a significant incision in the eyelid depending on the degree to which the eyelid has sagged.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then introduce with the probe along the two lines that you have marked, starting from the larger tear duct into the smaller one.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your incision is near the natural hairs, it should be as thick as that of the king's [presumably meaning it should be of a significant and proper size].
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then place the needle at one of the two angles of the wound, and then scrape that entire area clean, and then suture the two edges together with a thread or fine woolen yarn, and clean the blood, and if you wish to do so, adhere any excess pus over both eyebrows using sticky substances, but if not, disregard it.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And then loosen the suture of the wounds within three or four days, and then treat it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you want, leave the wound without suture, and treat it with something that dries and tightens, for the eyelid being raised requires the sealing of the wound and the addition of thread; but suturing is better. Therefore, this is what the ancients teach about treating such conditions.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	But nevertheless, be careful with the patient, and it is of good practice, and there should be no fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another method in surgery, which involves marking on the eyelid in such a way as to resemble a myrtle leaf, and then elevate the eyelid with three separated and gathered points following this shape:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	But if it is not possible to do that, hold the points, and since this is not equal, then take a needle with thread and insert it into the middle of the marking, and place another thread near the larger lacrimal duct, and the second thread near the smaller lacrimal duct, and adjust the threads equally between these points, and then lift your hand evenly to elevate the entire marked area as we have described.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then bring together the two lips of the wound with a suture, and care for it so that it may heal.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	And if an abscess occurs in your incision or your fracture, treat that abscess with wax and the like, and with ointments.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And sometimes you may encounter an eyelid where the eyelashes are inverted, in which case you should use what we have mentioned about incision; however, in some cases, suturing is more intricate.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	To anesthetize with reeds follows this method:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	and this involves turning the eyelid and splitting the structure inside as I have described; then, skillfully make two reeds or two thin strips whose length should be according to the length of the eyelid and their width should be half the width of the spatula.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already made incisions at the ends of each part where the threads are.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then carefully attach each [reed or strip] above what is excessive on the eyelid of the eye, and secure the reeds of each part with a strong binding, and leave it like that for several days, because the constriction will cause the excess to die off and dry up and fall inside so that it will come out by itself.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	And if it is delayed, then break it with the tongs, and then treat the wound until it heals.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Therefore, when it is secured, the eyelid is lifted and the hairs do not poke.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the form of two canes which you shall make according to this design:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and there should be no more or less than the quantity of the length and the width.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	On the removal of hard, piercing hairs from the eye with a needle.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When there are unnatural, hard, rough, and piercing hairs affecting the eyes, then the procedure is that you should take a fine needle and place it in some fine linen or silk, and then adjust the ends of the needle and hold each end delicately.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And the length of the threads should be equal to one palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then you should place another fine thread underneath it in ointment, and hold the ends of that thread if you wish.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then place the patient's head on your shoulder, and do it near the sunlight so that your work is clear, for this is a delicate and intricate operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then insert the needle into the root of the hair that requires treatment, and make it penetrate quickly into the eyelid before removing it from the natural hair.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull the hair up and insert it into the tweezers, and let the hairs be one or two or three, but no more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand with the tweezers until the hair is removed from the eyelid along with the natural hair.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	But if the hair is held by the tweezers and is not removed, pull the tweezers towards the sides with the resin that you have prepared with it, until the hair is pulled out completely from the root.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And wash it with the smoke of a torch, because when you pull out the tweezers and the resin, you should shout loudly and clean the area thoroughly, and leave it covered for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place and grows on healthy flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the hair is shorter, then you attach a long natural hair to it, and lift with that, or leave it inside so that it is stretched over some space, and then you lift it.
Capitol .xiii.	Capitol .xiii.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	For the given line:
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When there is inflammation in the eye, and it is a contraction of the eyelid when it pulls inward or to one side, either right or left, due to poor healing of a wound or dryness or from cautery, and this condition is called leporine (or hare-lip), and this inflammation can be natural or accidental, and it is caused by poor healing of wounds or dryness or from cautery, or similar maladies.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The method of the operation is that you cut through that hardened area and separate the lips, then place a piece of linen cloth in between them, and tie them together until they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And it is not necessary to treat it with methods that dry out the causes excessively; for if you do this, the inflammation will return worse than it was before at any time.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use methods that soften it, such as fenugreek; fumigate with water in which the ashes and seed of it are mixed, or use a liniment of diphylleia, which is liquefied with some oils, and soak the cloth in this, and treat it with that.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your cure is that you should pierce with all ingenuity what has not been consolidated according to the form at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation which we have mentioned is nothing but some correction of the dislocation that does not return to its original form as it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	For the given sentence:
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This type of inflammation that occurs in the eyelid is properly called blepharitis; and it can be either a natural condition or an accidental one.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	And an accidental one is caused by a wound or by a cut or by cautery or by similar things.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the method of the operation is that you take a needle with double thread, and insert it into the flesh, making it pass from the left tear duct to the right one, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then stretch the flesh at the points above with the needle and secure it with the needle, and incise with a wide spatula.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And then return the shape of the eyelid as needed; if not, take the reed and place it in the cut shape, and use that to turn the eyelid, and make the two slits on the side of the eyelid accordingly.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And let the ends of the two slits be at two angles of the incision that you have made where they converge, and let an angle be formed by them when they come together to create a shape.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is the Greek letter: lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then remove the flesh in such a quantity that it exposes the sharp edge of it, which is the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the separated parts and sew them with wool thread; and then treat them with what we have said about the softening medicines and the warm compresses until it is healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if you need to incise due to a fissure or suture or cautery, then you must make a flat incision on the skin of the eyelid as indicated.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate with a warm compress between the two lips as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In summary, regarding the treatment of incisions that are above or below, which occur during the operation, according to the form in which the incision is prepared, and that form varies in different ways.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the wise artisans always prepare in each manner that is possible for them until they restore the figure to its natural form or close to it, and they do so according to what is most convenient for the patient concerning the operation and the instruments in their best conditions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation occurs in many men, you should ensure that the upper eyelid is hardened with the white part of the eye, and it becomes restricted from its easy movement and natural functions. Therefore, you must insert the tip of a needle under the eyelid, lifting it up or extending it with an uncial instrument.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you cut the adhesion with a delicate spatula, which should not be sharp for incisions, keeping it slightly blunt so that the patient is not disturbed during the operation, and remove the spatula so that it does not hurt the wound with its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And let your incision carefully separate that adhesion so that the eyelid returns to its natural form and the entire adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then you put salty water into the wound with which you wash it; or distill juniper dissolved in water onto it.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate the eyelid from the wound with a splint, and place wool soaked in egg white over the wound; on the third day, use consolidating treatments until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	On the incision of the ingrowth and flesh prominence of the lacrimal area.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that an ingrowth can occur in two ways: either it is nervous, resembling a hard, delicate tissue; or it is non-nervous, resembling white congealed moisture. When you touch it with iron, if it can be grasped and easily separated with tweezers, then it should be cut off without inserting the tweezers into it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both these conditions do not begin except from the greater tear duct, within which it gradually covers the sight and prohibits light and movement of the eye.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take a needle and insert into it a horsehair or ox hair or cow hair, or something similar, or strong thread; or double the small end of the needle little by little and place that in the middle of the nail, and penetrate that with the needle, and bind the nail with thread; extend that to the parts above, and scrape with the hair the side of the nail which is the matrix.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And in this way, you follow that with the hair inside the posterior of the patient. 
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then you incise the remnant at the base of the lacrimal duct with a delicate spatula or small scissors, and separate the tissue around the natural lacrimal duct so that from this incision there does not result a continuous flow of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the nail is removed with the sun one inch extended or with tweezers, as we have said, and then it should be extracted with a spatula that looks like this:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And be careful that with the spatula you do not touch the corneal layer so as to cause a rupture and pierce the pupil.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then, put a little salt or finely made plaster into the eye and leave it there until the next day; then treat it with what is necessary until it heals.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the nail is not sensitive and you cannot insert the needle, nor can it be placed in that one-inch area, then this kind of nail issue is treated with medicines and heals in this way, as I have described and detailed in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to incise that area, then open the eye of the patient and take a fine spatula with a sharp point shaped like this:
am subtilitat.	with subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if you find that it is rarefied and confused and penetrates into that area, then distill from your preparation into the eye using finely made plaster or with roasted plaster or with ground salt, and cover the eye until the next day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat the operation so that all of it is removed, except for the opposing abscess which should be cauterized in the wound, because when you leave that behind, treat the initial abscess until it is healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat your operation on that area until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The prominence of the lacrimal flesh, if noticed in the nose causing great harm, should be suspended with an ounce; and cut that part from it, but do not complete the incision to avoid cutting the tear ducts.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a decoction of rue and make compresses until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	On the incision of albizia bark and what is born from tightly attached flesh in the nose.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Sometimes in the eyes of some individuals, rough flesh grows and covers the pupil, or approaches and presses near the eyelids, binding them from the outer parts and assembling like a barrier around it.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	The operation involves the patient placing their head on your lap. Then open the eyes of that person and gather all that flesh with suitable tweezers; hold it with forceps or tweezers. Then incise the flesh at the beginning until everything is finished with the scalpel, and be careful not to damage the eye during your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And let your incision be either with the scalpel which we have recommended in the section on the nail, or with small scissors with which mustard is collected according to how it will come together near this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Therefore, once your incision is complete and all that flesh is sutured up, then fill the wound with finely ground salt or sprinkle on it a powder red in color and similar to corrosive medicines, and place an egg white over the wound to ensure it does not become inflamed.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if any cause for concern remains and there is excessive bleeding, and you fear an inflammatory swelling, then leave the wound open and treat that inflammation with whatever alleviates it, and afterward continue to dress the area over which you operated until it heals. Similarly, handle the flesh around the wound of this kind in the same manner.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	However, you must know that all healing of the wound should occur either by natural means or by accidental means, and act with caution; do not perform any of these operations with your hand until you see that the member can sufficiently withstand such an operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	On the collection of blood in the wound.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Blood comes from red veins that swell over the wound and hinder proper healing, and it can prolong the wound's healing process for many days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning that you consider whether the fever in which scabies is present is strong and there is no other disease besides scabies, then you collect that scabies.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And it is that you command the patient to rest their head on your lap, and then suspend those veins with one ounce or two according to your judgment; and let that ounce be of subtle doubling in this manner:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	Or do two ounces gradually into one mass according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And then gather those veins with fine ligatures delicately, and cleanse the blood little by little until you see those veins emptied of the humor and turned inside out.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And be careful not to lead the humor with the tip of the spatula; and if your operation is in the middle of the day under the sun, be firm in your operation so that you only incise those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed this, then distill into the humor some wormwood or rue so that with its acidity it corrodes what remains of the scab.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	But if it is not possible for you to gather everything at that time, then apply a poultice over the entire area with something that reduces the pain, and leave it for several days until the pain is subdued and an abscess is prevented.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat the same procedure on it until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form of the forceps:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	Of the reduction of nasal fractures.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat abscesses with cautery or with sharp and burning medicine as mentioned before in the narrative and it does not heal, then do not generate anything new but rather make incisions over the abscess to reach its maturity, and extract all the moisture that is within it along with the pus until the bone is revealed.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And when the bone is revealed and corruption or blackening appears on it, then scrape it with an instrument of this form: 
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is named the rough head, and it is made of Indian iron, and its head is round like a sieve which is made pointed by filing or burnished by subtle puncturing (as in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place that over the corrupted area of the bone, and then rotate it between your fingers, pressing your hand little by little until you know that the corruption is smooth.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And this should be done several times, and then restore the area with drying and styptic causes.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Therefore, if the area is consolidated and good flesh has formed there, and the body has separated from the pus and remains this way for forty days, and it does not recur, and does not become inflamed again, and no other accident occurs, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, then the goal is not to generate anything but to reduce the fracture to its original form, and according to this method: you must expose the bone with fire or an acute medicine, and once the bone is exposed, then take it in such a manner as follows:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The tip of the tool should be triangular, and the shaft should be gradually tapered toward the end in such a way.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And then place that on the bone, near the lacrimal area; extend your hand a little beyond the wound, and then rotate your hand with the tool until it penetrates the entire bone. The patient will feel this greatly as air will escape when you do so.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore, at this time restore the area with astringent and drying medicines as has been said.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Therefore, when the flesh and the area have hardened, the material that was flowing out to the external parts returns inside, thus making the condition lighter for the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	On the reduction of the prominence of the eye.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the eye protrudes entirely and no harm or diminishment occurs to the vision, then you must lax the patient, and then follow up with ventilation through the neck by scarification and good suction; and then apply an ointment made of acacia, aloe, ensam, and sarcocollo to the eye, and then firmly place the poultice over the eye with powdered mot.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the method for the powders is to take strips of lion's fur, and each strip should be folded into four pieces; and make those into powder. 
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then place those one over the other according to the amount that the wound requires.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And then apply pressure on those with a hard cloth with strong binding; and repeat the cupping with suction after scarification; and then remove the cups and leave the wound exposed day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if the bandage becomes loose, then it must be made tight again.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And then remove the bandage day and night as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if you find the wound already reduced, that is good, and if not, then repeat the plaster with the powders and binding and cupping until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	On the incision of the elevation of the uvea (or iris).
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is a disruption in the uvea and it becomes prominent, protruding beyond the eyelids like a grain of raisin, and if this causes human-shaped distortion, and you wish to incise this, the operation should be as follows: you insert a needle into the root of the uvea from below upwards, then place another needle with a double thread at the lacrimal part, penetrate with that one while leaving the first needle in its position; then incise the area of the double thread and lift the portion of the uvea around the needle's circumference, and tighten that one.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then remove the needle and place over the wound wool infused in egg white, leaving it until the thread falls with the grape.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then treat the wound with something that strengthens the interior so that the plague may be healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And sometimes it gathers from all sides with a circle of cloth around the wound to form a large swelling, and then pierce it with a fine spatula to reach the core of the wound, allowing the whitish moisture to drain out, and reduce the swelling as soon as possible.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen the interior so that it may be healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio de alconati.	On the treatment of dislocations.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This illness, which is called dislocation, is nothing but swelling that is concentrated in the wound, resembling descending water, and it is not that.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The method of treating it is to have the patient sit on an adjusted and straight chair. Then take his head in both of your hands and move it so that you see the swelling come to the sides. Then dry it so that it does not descend, and keep the light, so that the patient sees the causes just as they appear.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not descend downwards, know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	And if the drainage to the sinus has not been prepared as we have said, then make the patient sit between your hands and take a thin spatula and use it on the cheekbone, separating a little of the continuation of the conjunctiva from the corneal layer at the margin (inside the eye socket), until the sinus is properly drained.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Once it is properly drained, then you should instill warm water into the nose, in which you have mixed honey, or water in which you have already boiled fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then it should be treated with other methods until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the treatment of water dripping from the nose.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already mentioned the types of water in the division and which ones are suitable for piercing with clear sermon, according to health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Now you must make the patient sit between your hands on a chair and tie their nose tightly with a binding agent.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And then place your left hand near the eyelid of his eye if the eye that has the water is the left eye; or with your right hand, if the eye is the right one.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And then with your right hand take the almond, if the eye is the left one; or with your left hand, if the eye is the right one.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And then place the tip of the almond near the crown along the thickness of the ray in the white part of the eye by the smaller tear duct, and then insert the almond with force and rotate your hand in that manner.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then penetrate into the white part of the eye and feel that the almond has already reached its destination.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And it is necessary that the length of the path of the almond to the front be the same as the distance from the pupil to the end of the black part, which is the crown of the eye; for you will see the pupil through the transparency of the corneal layer with the vision of the eye.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And then place the almond in the location where the water is, and then pull it down once and then again, and if the water descends quickly, you will see the patient immediately regain their sight, with the almond still in their eye.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then rest for a little while; if the water has descended, now you may rest again before any medicine is administered.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And then when it is cut and does not descend, you may extract the medicine easily, and rotate your hand slowly little by little; then dissolve a small amount of clear gem salt in water and wash inside the wound with it. Then place outside the wound a piece of cloth or stopper or wool soaked in ointment and egg white and bind it to the wound with that.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	And we and those of our time place on that wound some crushed meat mixed with egg white.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if your medicine does not adhere to the wound due to its hardness—for there are some people whose wounds are very hard—then you must take the spatula named alberid, which has the following form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And then pierce that joint with it, and do not force your hand too much, but only make a fine place for the medicine to enter.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then apply the medicine as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you should complete your work by preparing the patient's sleeping area properly, in which they sleep on their back in a dark room, and all movements are prohibited.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And pause in the nature of it so that its natural flow is cleansed, and do not move their head to the right or left at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And apply the bandage according to its position within the third day. 
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then remove that person from the dark room and expose them to daylight, and show them some causes, and then return the bandage on their eyes for seven days.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And it is not necessary for you to do this at the time of the treatments or right before the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	It is necessary that you dilute this so that the water can gently pass through with great and vehement care. 
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	And if an abscess has formed and needs to be cauterized, then you must drain the pus before the seventh day, and treat it with something that reduces the abscess.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then you bind the patient's gaze and place something over their face through which the air can pass for several days, keeping them in the darkest room.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	Then gradually move them out of that room and engage in conversation about their concerns.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in surgery, it is not exempt for the disciple to see certain things, and thus you should be bold during the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And it has been reported to us by some of those who are from Artach, and some have said that they make fire in the Ayrac, a container that is pierced with holes through which water is drawn. 
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	But however I have not seen anyone in our land who has perfected this, nor have I read this in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of medications that one should use for those who are ignorant of them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And let them be made of brass or proper iron, and let the extremities of them have this subtle triangular shape, the sharp end thus as that is the form.
Capitol .xxiv.	Capitol .xxiv.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	From the treatment of flesh hanging from the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose there are diverse growths attached from which is some cause that resembles the stinger of bees or a polyp-like creature; and this disease is called polypus because it resembles that creature represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And if it is cancerous flesh, it appears pale; and that which is lion's flesh is not of a dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, for those who have in these flesh areas no fraudulent nor cancerous conditions, it is necessary that the patient sit between your hands and place them in the sun, and you should unblock his nostrils, and pierce the affected area with a needle in those flesh parts.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then extract it from the outer parts, and then divide what you have grasped of those with a sharp and fine spatula from one part until you know that all the flesh has been removed; so that if there remains any reason for which the amputation is possible, then cut through with one of the fine instruments easily until nothing remains that could cause it to stay.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	And if it is ruled by pus or an abscessed aposteme, then you apply what is necessary; if it is one of the malignant apostems, then you cut and cauterize it until the blood is stopped and all the cavities are removed.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And then it should be placed in the nose near the beginning with good wine or water.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	But if the nose is open and you process moisture that reaches the palate, then you know that it is already healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	But if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you know that inside there is flesh that has not been cleared of pus over the bones of the nose to which the amputation has not reached.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore, at this time you must insert a thread into the area where there is a lump, and tie knots along the thread, placing between each knot the length of a finger or thumb, and then introduce the patient and insert one end of the thread into the nose using a rod or another means that is possible for you.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And once this has been done, that the patient's odorament [scent or breath] be drawn into the nasal passages, and let it sit on their tongue, for it is seen that repeated practice of this action by children in schools makes it easier for whoever wishes to do so.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then place the two ends of the thread, one end that comes out over the nose and the other that remains inside the nose, and then apply a suture to the flesh with the knots that are in the thread, and do this until you know that the flesh is already bound by the knots of the thread.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then extract the thread, and place near the nose at the site of blood extraction a plug, and do this for three days or longer until the medicine corrodes all that is rotten from the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And then at the end of the treatment, place a lead tube in the nose for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	If you decide to use a drying method for the treatment, apply that method.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument used for nasal purging with which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And make this from silver or clay, which should resemble a small open lamp, like a little bowl, and the mouth similarly.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you want, make a closed tube like a reed, and the tube of the instrument for purging should be flat and open; to which you attach a handle at the back end with which you hold it when heating it in oil or whatever juice or suction-causing substance you wish.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these capipurgi are precious: take of beaver fat, white balm, ginger, saffron costmary, long pepper, scammony, and spikenard each an ounce; mix with wheat juice and celery juice, and make pills; dissolve one pill in tepid water, and administer it into the nostrils of the patient while they lie down.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	About nasal polyps in the outer parts of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	White spots appear as polyps in the outer parts of the nose, and they grow and change within a few days, during which time one should observe them.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And because of this, you should incise it at the beginning of its appearance and remove all of it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Then place a cautery or a burning medicine in the same location over the area.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	But if the incision is delayed until it has grown, then consider whether it has become hardened, firm, of dark color, and with little sensation. In that case, do not touch it with iron as it is a chronic abscess; for white spots can lead to great harm when one incises such an abscess recklessly.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the abscess is of a slight touch and not of dark color, and when incision is possible throughout that area, then evacuate the patient and incise it without fear, and treat the area with something that dries and constricts until it heals.
Capitol .xxvi.	It seems like you've provided a section header, "Capitul .xxvi.", which translates to "Chapter .xxvi." or "Chapter 26" in English. This likely marks the beginning of Chapter 26 in whatever text or document you're working with. If you have more content from this chapter that needs translation or interpretation, feel free to provide it!
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	On sewing the nose and the lips and the ear when continuity is disrupted by an injury or a similar cause.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when you encounter a rupture of continuity in one of these cartilages, there is little benefit in that operation unless it is for some men.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when you encounter any cause of those wounds, you should consider whether it is fresh with its blood, and then you stitch the two edges of the wound together with suture, and then care for what is inside so that it heals.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the edges of the wound are already separated and each part has healed, then you must scratch each part of its visible tissue until blood comes out. 
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then align the two lips with sutures and tighten them, and sprinkle dragon's blood powder over them, which has been crushed, and place a piece of diafinicon plaster or some other consolidating plaster over the powder, and leave that bandage for two days or three, and then remove it and replace the plaster until the stitches are absorbed by themselves, and finally treat with an ointment until it is healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	And the method of suturing is that you close the continuity either with needles as we have recommended for stitching the abdomen, or close the continuity with stitches in such a way that it becomes known to you.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	On the extraction of those causes that occur within the two lips in the internal parts.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Often observed in some men within the internal parts of their lips are hard swellings resembling lard, and some of them are smaller while others are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, you must turn the lips and carefully cut each of those hard swellings from all sides, and then fill the space with crushed sage until the blood is constricted. Then wash it with sweet wine and treat the area with a styptic agent until it is healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	The text provided seems to be in an archaic or constructed language that draws from several Romance languages. It appears to describe medical procedures. However, the phrase "Capitol .xxviii." does not provide any substantial content for translation as it likely refers to a chapter number (28) and doesn't contain information about medical practices.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	From the incision of the flesh attached in the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	There are many swellings on the gummed flesh that the ancients called alveoli; therefore, you must suspend it with a hook or hold it with forceps and incise it down to its root, allowing the pus or blood to flow.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	Then apply over the area some crushed styptic or other powder that is astringent or drawing.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if the flesh returns, then incise it again, and cauterize it, for afterwards it will not return with the cautery.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	On the extraction of teeth with force.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth, both those inside and outside, and between the gums, there are rough scabs, ulcers, and some swellings that are blackened or turned yellow or green, indicating corruption has reached the gum, thus causing the teeth to become ulcerated.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And thus it is necessary that you seat the patient between your hands and place his head on your thigh, and file down the teeth in which appear these scurvy-like lesions and cause sand-like particles to fall out so that no cause remains among them, and this is done for the blackening and yellowing and other conditions so that they may be cleansed.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Therefore, if what remains is at the beginning of the reason, that's good; and if not, then repeat the reasoning on those things on the next day and the second and the third until you arrive at the final statement in what you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And know that teeth require various types of forceps and different shapes according to what is prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And therefore, the razor with which the tooth is cut from inside is different from the razor with which it is cut between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of razors you should prepare, which you will see soon:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter .xxx.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	For the removal of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	Cover that you cure the tooth of its pain with all ingenuity and delays in total eradication of it, for there is no cause that supplants the extraction when it is eradicated, for it is a sublime substance within which is expulsion during its extraction.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	And when the patient is forced to have that tooth extracted, you must be certain which one is the painful tooth, because often the pain moves from the patient and settles in a healthy tooth, and if you extract that one, the pain will not cease until the diseased and painful tooth is removed, for we have already seen this through the operation of barbers.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, you must be certain which tooth is causing pain, and once you know well, then you need to scrape around the tooth with a spatula that has some medicinal property, until it separates the tooth from the gum entirely. Then remove that [tooth] with your fingers or with fine scissors little by little until it comes out completely.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	Then take large strong forceps for good grip or a strong extraction tool, and hold the patient's head between your hands so that you have a firm grasp and it does not move, then pull the tooth straight out in such a way that you do not break it nor cause greater pain to the patient.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And if it is not easily extracted, then take one of those instruments and remove it from all sides with ease, exerting the removal in such a way as was done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is loose or corroded, then you must wrap that loose part with cloth and tighten it with the tip of a fine thread so that it does not break when you apply pressure to it with forceps.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And it is necessary that you operate carefully with incision around the entire part of the gum and be mindful of your strength so as not to cut too deep and leave any part broken, and return to the patient for the malice may be worse than the initial pain.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And beware lest you do what some ignorant barbers do in their rashness and audacity regarding the removal of them; for they administer not what we have recommended; because many times they bring upon men great sicknesses which are more difficult to cure, and the roots of them remain stubbornly embedded, or some of those [roots], or that you extract it along with some bones of the jaw, as we have witnessed many times.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And then for the extraction, wash the mouth with hot wine or sour wine with salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if bleeding occurs because of this, just as it might happen occasionally, then sprinkle some amount of cypress on the wound, and if the cypress does not help, use a cautery.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The form of the forceps and delicate tongs with which a tooth is extracted at the beginning should be long on the outer end, short in manipulation, and thick, so that they do not bend when you use them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And they should be such that the thick part is in the middle so that when you grip with them, they do not bend, and their outer ends are short.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And they should be made of Indian iron, properly fashioned with straight ends, and at the ends of these, there are teeth that fit into each other and grip tightly by constriction. Sometimes, the ends of these are shaped like the beak of a bird called a ciconia, which is a stork, and it has a strong constricting power.
Capitol .xxxi.	Capitol .xxxi.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	For the eradication of teeth and extraction of the bones of the jaw that are trapped.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need to extract a broken tooth that has some remaining root, then it is necessary for you to place over the area a poultice for one or two days until the site becomes softened; and then insert tweezers or pliers whose ends are shaped like the beak of a bird called stork or vulture, in the form of forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The ends of them should be made smooth like a file or a plane.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you do not succeed in extracting it with these forceps or tweezers, then you must scrape over the root and remove all the flesh and insert an instrument called a lever, which is a small lever that has this form:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And let one end be thick and the other small, and it should not be sharp to avoid breaking it.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Therefore, if by this method the root is extracted, it is good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments, whose forms are as follows: the form of the first instrument is a triangular end that has some thickness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second instrument is that it should be triangular and have a finer tip.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And already it is aided with this instrument having two prongs, the form of which is as follows:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And with other instruments which are used for tooth extraction; because it is very helpful to use this instrument which resembles an ounce in size, and this is its form:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	From the twisted or shortened triangular extremity, which has some thickness, and is not inserted in such a way that it does not break.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And you should know that the dental instruments are sharp and similar to other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	May the skilled and subtle artisans find for themselves according to what the operation and diverse diseases signify; for there are diseases for which the ancients neither spoke of nor left specific instruments, due to the various forms of different kinds.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the jawbone or other bones of the mouth are fractured, or if you can, then carefully treat it in its place using what is appropriate from the instruments and forceps that we have mentioned in the extraction of tooth roots, and assist with the procedure which has this form:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And let any swelling be reduced little by little, and it should be compressed or held with the mouth so that it does not spread or escape until the bone is entirely set; then restore the area with appropriate medicines.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a small hole or decay in the bone, then clean that area of the decay and its blackness, and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Capitol .xxxii.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	For the given line:
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When the prominent teeth do not follow their natural course, and especially so in women, and more so in those of venerable age; therefore you must consider: if a tooth is close to another tooth, and it is not possible to extract or pull it out, then you should root that one; but if it is not attached to another tooth, then you incise it with this instrument which has the following form; and it resembles a pig's snout, and it is made of Indian iron with an extremely sharp edge.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And let your incision be such that you cut it over several days due to the hardness of the tooth, and that none of the other teeth be infected.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if a tooth is prominently exposed to filing, then file it with an Indian iron file, which has this form:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And if it is all of Indian iron and the file itself; and it should be made of fine particles like a file with which needles are made, with which the tooth is filed down little by little over many days with ease, so that no other tooth is damaged or falls out.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And then tie it at the end, and shave that area with sharp razors.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if it is a tooth of which a part is broken and hurts the tongue, then you must file that inside so that the roughness of that fragment is removed and smoothed, and fill it so that the tongue is not hurt nor the speech corrupted.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On the restoration of damaged teeth with gold or silver filings.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When you encounter front teeth that have been displaced or knocked out by impact or fall, and the patient cannot bite down on what they eat, and you have treated it with astringent medicines but your treatment has not helped, then in order to prevent further issues, they should be secured with gold filings and not silver, because silver can corrode and will break within a few days, whereas gold never changes.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And the filling should be of such fineness and thickness as can enter between the teeth; the method is to take the filling material and place twice its amount between two healthy teeth, then increase it with two twists of the filling material between the damaged teeth, or if there is one or multiple [damaged teeth], until the thread reaches the healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then repeat the incision within the area where you began, and insert your hand with ease and skill so that it is not damaged.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And use the force with which you hold the thread to tie the roots of the teeth that do not come out.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then cut off the excess ends of the thread with forceps or scissors, and carefully place them in each location, tucking them between the healthy tooth and the damaged one, so that they do not injure the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then tie it straight like a bow.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	And if it comes undone or breaks, secure it or them with another thread in such a manner throughout the entire process.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the correction of two healthy teeth and two damaged ones, just as you see these tied:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when it is done that one or two teeth are returned to their proper places, and they have grown back as we have described, and that they are repaired.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And this is not done except by skilled artisans and wise ones.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And sometimes a piece of cow bone is shaped like a tooth and placed in the location where the tooth is missing, and it is fastened as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	On the condition of the ligament that affects the tongue and prevents speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament that affects the tongue sometimes is natural, with which a person is born, or it is accidental and occurs due to an injury that has already healed.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation is to open the mouth of the patient, with their head positioned in your lap; then lift their tongue, and cut that nervous ligament according to the width within which the tongue is separated from its root.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	But if there is any hardness or knotting in that area, and this is due to the healing of an injury, then you take a knife and cut through that area according to the width within which you have cut the ligament and dissolved the knot.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And be careful not to make a cut in the surface of the flesh and that you do not tear the artery here, causing blood to flow.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And then the wound of the incision should be washed with wine or with sour wine or with cold water; and then place a linen cloth over it; this is the method by which the patient should keep the cloth over the wound every night to prevent it from healing over again.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	And if bleeding occurs, place powdered vitriol over the area; but if the bleeding continues, then cauterize the area with a red-hot cautery which is appropriate for this situation.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with other methods until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	On the extraction of a ranula from the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes, a swelling similar to a small tumor appears on the tongue, hindering its natural function; and it grows significantly until it fills the mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the procedure is to have the patient open their mouth widely in front of the sunlight and examine the swelling.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see it of a dark or black color, hard, in which the patient does not feel sensation, then do not touch that which is gangrenous.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it has turned white, where there is moisture, then you put your finger in it and incise that with a fine spatula, and cut it entirely; and if blood spurts out during the time of your operation, then you place over it three layers of cloth, which is vitriol, until the blood stops.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then return to your work until you have completely removed it, washing it with sweet wine and salt; and treat that area with the other treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XXXVI.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the extraction of abscesses from the ears and those that form in the throat, as well as other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When they occur in the throat area, these are glands that are similar to swelling, which appear externally and are called the ears. When you treat them as we have said in the division and they do not heal, then consider whether the abscess is hard, of dark color, with little sensation; then do not touch it with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of reddish color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron because of the flow of blood; first let that mature within, and now you can either pull that out or it will break off by itself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of white color, like a root, and its tip is delicate, then that is what needs to be cut.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation on it is that you consider, before your operation, if the swelling has rested from the cautery with complete rest or if it has decreased somewhat; and now make the patient sit in front of the sun, with their head towards the south, open their mouth, and the servant takes between their hands to pull out the tongue using a noble instrument of this form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And it should be made of silver or steel, and it should be sharp like a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	So when you press with that instrument on the tongue and the swelling is shown to you, place your thumb over it, then take some medicine and put it in the swelling, and pull it out as much as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And another thing that you pull some cause from the tunics, and then cut into it with an instrument of which this is the form:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	And it resembles forceps, but the ends of it are curved, so that the opening of each one is in line with the other, being sharp, which is made of iron and well-tempered.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	But if this instrument is not available to you, then cut with a spatula of which this is the shape: And it should be sharp on one side, blunt on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And after you have incised one side, incise the other in the same manner of cutting, and then wash the patient with cold water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is excessive bleeding, wash with water boiled with pomegranate peel or myrtle leaves and other similar astringent substances until the bleeding is stopped, and then treat it until it heals.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And sometimes abscesses form in the throat or around the ears, and you should incise them as I have said in the cutting of two sides equally.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I have already treated a woman with an abscess that had formed in her throat, which abscess tended to a dark color, was not very sensitive, and had already closed off her throat. The woman was breathing with great difficulty, and she had been deprived of food and water. She was nearing death if it had lasted for one more day or two.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had risen so much that it was halfway between two spots where it would burst through in two places.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Therefore, I carefully cut into one of its areas and placed it in one of its openings, and pulled that part out, and the larger portion was extracted. Then I incised from where I understood to make another cut, then I closed the opening, and held its tongue, and then I placed the opening in that abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then I cut away a large part of it, and only a little blood flowed from it.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Thus, the swelling of that woman is absolute, and she should start drinking water immediately, and then eat food. So I did not stop incising that abscess many times for a long time, and another abscess would form in place of it, which I continued to incise as long as it persisted.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Thus, I took some material and cauterized the swelling of it, adding more; then I wandered around and did not know what God would do with that nearby me. 
Capitol .xxxvii.	Capitol .xxxvii.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	From the beginning of the swelling when it becomes inflamed.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When phlegm forms in the swelling, and it becomes inflamed and elongated, then it is called a perpendicular; and if it is in the part that is thick and round, then it is called a bubo.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	However, when it is treated with what we have said in the division, and you do not see your treatment working, and eventually you find that the inflammation has already subsided and become subtle, then you must incise those parts that are rounded and added; and if it extends to that length and is bloody, of dark or black color, and does not affect the sensation, then you must attempt the incision, for in that case there is fear for the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see it according to the manner I have described, regarding its whiteness and length, then make the patient sit and press their tongue with an instrument that fits its shape, and then place the ounce in the new position, pull it down, and incise it with one of two instruments used for incising two halves. 
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And it is necessary that you do not incise beyond what is aligned with the natural boundary of its addition, for if you cut more deeply, you will impede their speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And then for the incision, use what we have recommended in the section of two melons, and take care that it is healed. 
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the patient was frightened by the incision, one must use ingenuity in the cauterization to address their fear, and the manner of the cautery is with sharp water. You place the head of the patient on your knee, then press their tongue with the instrument we have mentioned, and then take the water which we have described in the chapter on cauterization, and warm it with that living fire, and hold that which is neither thick nor thin, and fill the concavity of the instrument which has this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Let the extremity of it be concave like a spoon's cavity, and place the instrument with the medicine on the ulcer. The patient should lie on their side so that no saliva or mucus from the mouth of that person mixes with the intrinsic medicine, so that it does not descend by this cause onto the throat of the patient and harm them.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	Then place your hand with the medicine and apply it to the uvula for a brief period until you see it become blackened and soothed by the action of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you want, take a cloth and wrap it around the extremity of the reed, and soak the cloth in the medicine, and insert the reed with the cloth into a tube so that the cloth adheres to that tube, and do this as many times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the grape, and then let it dry out until it dries and falls off after three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to repeat the medicine, do so, and then for the cauterization, clean around the grape with a cloth soaked in wine, and modify that which is in the circle of it from the medicine, and wash it with cold water, and treat it externally with embrocation, and internally with decoctions until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this type of treatment is safer than incision and lasts longer in terms of prevention.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Sometimes the uvula is cured with something subtler than cauterization and incision, for it is treated by sublimation in this manner: take calamus, hyssop, origanum, rue, sassafras, chamomile, fennel, and similar herbs; prepare all those ingredients or some of them in a pot, and let them be submerged in sour wine, and let them boil; the pot should be well sealed with appropriate sealing wax, and there should be a tube in the middle of the pot on which is placed a concave vessel made of silver or iron.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And insert the extremity into the patient’s mouth until the steam reaches the uvula over the tonsil, until the uvula is moved or obscured.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And then apply to those dry spotted areas, and be careful not to perform this treatment at the beginning of the formation of abscesses, because it would overly concentrate on the abscess, and you should not do that; instead, you should declare the presence of an abscess through cauterization.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	But if this instrument is not available to you, then take a reed and attach an eggshell to the end of it, so that the patient's mouth can be cleaned, because the eggshell prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On the extraction of thorns and other objects that adhere to the throat and other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Spotted objects adhering to the throat or fish bones or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then you must extract what is visible of those objects, on which you focus your sight, by pressing the tongue with an instrument in front of light, so that you can see clearly what is in the throat.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And that which does not appear and is hidden in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because by doing so the cause attached to the throat will be expelled through vomiting; or the patient should swallow a piece of raw onion or radish of lettuce or a piece of dry bread; or take a piece of dried sea sponge, and soak it strongly with honey, and then the patient swallows that, because when it reaches the place where the spines are and are extracted, they will be expelled.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And furthermore, take an eel and wrap it with honey, and place it inside until it is softly extracted; or take a leek and similarly cut it and insert it gently.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	Moreover, if they are not expelled by those methods we have mentioned, then use an instrument of lead according to this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And it should be thicker than a small tube, and at the end of it, there should be a cavity that you can insert into their throat easily.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And lift his head up, and be careful not to touch the bone of his throat, so that you do not cause harm to it or push against the bone or spine, or let the doctor do this with their hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	And however, the patient himself should intervene more, by his knowledge of the location of the attached cause and pressing into it, and pull his hand with the instrument onto it, all of this according to the quantity that is prepared for him inside before it is poulticed.
Capitol .xxxix.	Capitol .xxxix.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	Of bloodletting attached to the throat.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When leeches are being treated with what we have said in the section on treatment with medicines and not applied, consider then exposing the patient's body to sunlight, since you have examined their tongue with an instrument that we have recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore, if you perform bloodletting, extract it with a small needle or with subtle movements properly.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible for you to extract it with that [method], then take a concave cannula and insert it into the wound of the patient, and then place a heated iron in the concavity of the cannula, and do this as many times (until the bloodletting is complete and is removed from the wound) and abstain the patient from water for the whole day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	Then take a vessel full of cold water, open the mouth of the patient over it, and wash the mouth with it; and do not let any of it be swallowed, and move the water back and forth with your hand for about an hour, because the bloodletting will immediately contract upon feeling the water. 
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	If it is not effective with what we have recommended, then fumigate the patient with camphor or asafoetida using the instrument we have recommended for the fumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, whichever may apply. 
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And here is the translation line by line:
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not work, then you repeat the subfumigation multiple times, and abstain from drinking for the patient, eat salty and spicy foods, do not drink water, and thus it is necessary that this regimen be strictly followed.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument with which bloodsucking (or bloodletting) is performed on the throat when it is seen; and it resembles forceps in this way, although there is some curvature to it:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	The sentence provided seems to describe an instrument or tool used in medical procedures. Here is the translation line by line:
Capitol .xl.	Capitol .xl.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the sum of the discourse concerning abscesses and their incision.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	These abscesses are various types, in different ways, according to their recall, each one in this book. 
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And thus there are diversities in puncturing and drying them by two methods, of which one is through the type of abscesses that you insert into; and by this, you remove the humors.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second method is for places on the body where accidents occur, because an abscess that happens on the head is different from an abscess that happens on the buttocks; and an abscess that occurs in fleshy areas is different from an abscess occurring in a joint; and each of them has its own treatment by operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And regarding abscesses, some of them should not be pierced until near the maturation of the pus or completion of their development.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	And there are other abscesses that should be treated when they are cross-shaped and not yet mature according to their development, such as abscesses near joints. When an abscess occurs near a joint, its nature is prolonged until you can remove what is inside it; the ligaments or nerves of that joint may become corrupted, causing contraction of the limb. Or if the abscess is near a principal member, and you delay piercing it until it matures next to the principal member; or if it is near the buttocks, pierce it when it is not yet matured; do not pierce it raw, from incomplete digestion, but only when it is near the buttocks so that its poison does not spread and extend into parts within the buttocks, causing a fistula, or that it may become incurable at its end.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	But you must know the time of puncturing the abscess, and this is when it has matured.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you must know that it has matured when there is the cessation of pain and the end of fever, then the reduction of redness and pulsation, and the sharpness at the head of the abscess, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And you must know that the puncture should be made in the lowest part of the abscess where the pus is collected and from which the pus will come out for the healing of the prominence.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And the puncture should always be made along the length of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in areas of the hands or feet, and in places of veins, tendons, nerves, arteries; and finally, in all similar locations where there is no reflection; for in those that do reflect, use puncturing according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	But when the abscess is in a fleshy area, it is better to delay the puncture until its digestion is confirmed according to the second phase, as we have said; for if you puncture it before that, it prolongs the suffering of the poor person from it and increases filthiness, and hardens the lips of it and increases its depth.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	And here is the translation of the given line:
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And you must administer a small puncture for small abscesses, and for large abscesses, a large puncture or wide incision according to the size of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And there are other types of abscesses in which the skin must be indented and incised; when it is done this way, like cutting bread, and once it is done, it stands thus, as if you were incising into areas of gangrene and buboes.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And there are those that are incised with a section having three angles; and among them are those that are incised in the shape of a miter leaf, such as the abscesses on the ankles.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And there are those in which a round incision and a crescent-shaped incision are administered, similar to those [methods].
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	But for those that are not like superficial lion abscesses, you must pierce them with a superficial or flat puncture only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the abscess is large and has already collected much pus, you must pierce it, but do not worry about extracting all the pus at once; extract some of it first, then pack the abscess, and the next day extract a larger portion, repeating this process several times according to gradual progression until it is fully drained.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And especially if the patient is of weak constitution, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old person in decline, because the animal spirit often dissolves with the discharge of pus, and the patient dies quickly, and you operate on them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Take care of this chapter with great caution, and then your puncture in which you pierce these abscesses, you must clean the wounds and then consider if the wound of the abscess is small or a flat section; then apply the poultices of linen or old wool; and if the abscess is large, and the cracks of the puncture are many, then you must place a bandage on each track until they heal together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the abscess a part of the chain is severed or you have hollowed that out in the circumference, then you must compress it with old wool or linen thread, just as when you draw out pus or roots, keeping its moisture; strengthen that by the third day; and then treat it and care for it with whatever ointment is necessary until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	But if during the hour of your operation there is a flow of blood, then you should apply cold water and sour wine to linen cloths, and place those on the site of the bleeding multiple times.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	But if the bleeding persists, then you must administer treatment and care, and use powders which I have recommended in various places of this our book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	And if it is during winter time, and the location of the abscess is where there are many nerves, then you should infuse pillows with wine and hot oil, and place those on the affected areas.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is summer and the areas are fleshy, then you must place poultices soaked with water and oil or with wine and oil, and all of this should be rubbed in until the third day, as we have said, and then you must open the abscess, clean it thoroughly, and administer to its treatment what is appropriate for healing until it is healed.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the treatment of abscesses universally, but according to the method of distinction, I have already spoken of each abscess individually in separate chapters on how its cure should be carried out.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XLII.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Of the section of abscesses which come in the nape of the neck.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the nape of the neck, small abscesses appear, and they are similar to nodes that contain tunics which are in their formation; and the type of these is specks.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And from them are pustules, and those contain moisture similar to slime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And from those are the ones that contain moisture similar to pus, and they resemble each other; and among them are stone-like, hard ones.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all and in the extraction of those, there is no fear, because the extraction of those does not cause a contrary reaction.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in the section of those is that you express them with an instrument whose form is appropriate for this, which is called a probe, until you know what it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	For if what it contains is moisture, then you should divide it by making a longitudinal incision according to this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And begin at the section of line B within line G. Thus, as the humidity is evacuated, then you scrape that skin which contains that humidity, and do not leave any cause behind, for if any cause remains, gout will recur.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then submerge a cloth in Egyptian ointment, if it is available, and if not, in salt water; and fill the wound with that and leave it inside for another day, because with this you corrode everything that is rotten from that membrane.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then apply over that area Egyptian ointment secondly and thirdly if you need it, until you are confident there is no rupture at all in that layer; then treat the wound with an ointment until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if the abscess contains fatty knots, then you should incise it in the following manner:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	using a section in the shape of a cross, and once between the two lips of the incision, scrape it from all sides, and exert your strength in extracting the membrane that contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	But if your bow (or treatment) meets opposition, then do what I tell you first. 
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly treat the calcified abscess by drying and curing it as we have told you; drying on a calcified abscess is lighter, for it has little blood and little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And sometimes there are some swellings on the heads of some men in which it is not all moisture; the cause is that I dissected over a swelling on the head of an old woman and found the swelling as hard as a deaf stone, rough, white, which could not be broken, and if someone were to strike with that, it would hurt.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	But in other swellings or accidents on the head that are not part of this chapter, such as the swellings that come to the heads of children and affect the roots of the ears, but the section of these all is a superficial section.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And stop the perforation of those from the lower part of their body so that the flow of pus is relieved in the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And then treat those areas with whatever is appropriate for healing.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	On the incision of scrofula which occurs in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Moisture and humidity often cause these swellings in the neck and armpits; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck are caused by moisture generated between them, and all scrofula of this kind is within its own tissue, just as in the knots and swellings of the head, as we have mentioned.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the types of these scrofula are diverse, for some are stone-like, some contain humidity, and some are malignant and do not respond to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, in the one that you find to be of good disposition upon touching, where the color of what is apparent is close to the color of the swelling, and it is soft throughout, and not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the arteries, and is not hard, you should incise it with a superficial cut from the upper part to the lower part of the body within the line G to the line B, and scrape it thoroughly, and extend both lips of the swelling with forceps or with several forceps if needed, as we have said for swellings in the head, and extract it little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more cautious that the vein or nerves not be cut.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And let the spatula not be too sharp, so that it does not cause you to cut with your hand at the start, or disturb the patient, and cut what is not necessary to cut; for if you were to cut a vein or artery and prevent your operation, then apply vitriol powder or other powders which stop blood flow, and tighten the wound, and leave within that which reduces the sharpness of the swelling and soften the wound so it begins to become pus-filled.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is constricted.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Therefore, return to your operation before you have completed it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then examine with your index finger if there is any cause of the other small swellings, and cut out those and clean them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is near the main vein of the large swelling, you must not cut out that swelling from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Before that, you should wrap it with a strong folded cloth and leave it in such a way that it falls off by itself without causing harm.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the wound with old wool that you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then treat it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you cut out that swelling entirely, then you must bring the two edges of the wound together and sew them immediately so that there is no remaining excess material.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that there is excess material due to the size of the swelling, you must understand how to cut out its root, remove it, and apply stitching as mentioned.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for those swellings that contain moisture, pierce it with a superficial puncture where you see the site of maturation, and make an incision to drain the pus at the base of the swelling, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then administer an incision, along with warm applications and similar things, in order to corrode what remains of the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And then when you see the wound already cleansed, now you cure it with an ointment of generative flesh until it is healed. 
Capitol .xliii.	Capitol .xliii.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	From the incision of the pus pocket that occurs within the throat.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients used to call this incision an epilhot, and I have not seen anyone in our land who has performed such a procedure.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the speech of those [individuals]. 
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	And here is the translation of the given sentence:
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	Here is the translation line by line:
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, when we want to do this, we must incise the epiglottis three circles below the circles of the epiglottis, or make four small sections across its width in the area between two circles by quantity, so that the section is on the bone, not on the cartilage, and this location is suitable for cutting because it lacks flesh and has fewer blood vessels.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is inexperienced, it is necessary to extend the membrane of the throat with an instrument, and then cut the membrane until it reaches the canal, but avoid the blood vessels if you see any reason to do so.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	Then incise the bone as we have recommended; it is indicated over the section of the canal by the flame which is of that essence mixed with what is disconnected from it, and by the interruption of the voice.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Therefore, when the hour is unfavorable for the feared perforation, bring together the edges of the wound's membrane, and close it with only the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that promote flesh growth for healing.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Albucasis says that the essence of the sermon we have recounted is not just about seeing that some of these abscesses have blocked the windpipe of the patient, and the patient has come close to death, and their breath is cut off, and some proceed to incise the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe through the wound by some respiration and be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And by this, you should leave the wound open until the evil of the disease is consumed; and the evil lasts for three days; and then afterwards, you should sew up the wound and continue to treat it until it heals.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen in my practice is that a servant took a knife and inserted it into her throat and with that cut a part of the windpipe, and I was called for her treatment, and I found the sound she was making like that of someone dying, and upon discovering the wound, I found blood that had seeped from the small wound.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore, I must confess that she had not cut any vein or artery, and air was coming out of the wound, and she cured it until it healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And it does not affect the servant if there is hoarseness in the voice, and then after some days, they return to the improvement of their conditions.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that in the sectioning of the hernia there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Capitol .xliv.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Of sectioning over an abscess which occurs outside of the groin area, and is called a groin hernia. 
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This swelling named hernia of the groin is a large swelling according to the color of the body, and it occurs in women. 
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it is of two manners, for it can be either natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural case, there is no need to cure it.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental is of two manners, one similar to fatty knots, and the other manner is similar to an abscess which is caused by arterial obstruction, and in that case, there is danger.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And it is not necessary to apply pressure with iron unless it is in the case where it is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you should examine it and investigate it with your finger. If you find it similar to fatty knots and it is not suspended by any veins, then incise it as you would with knots, and extract it using what contains the flesh and bursiclam; otherwise, thoroughly scrutinize its entire nature, and then treat the area with whatever is necessary for healing until it is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLV.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	On the section of types of knots or nodules.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Regarding the various types of knots, I have already described all their types in the division [or section].
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And it is necessary that I recount thus the difference between a knot and a hernia as if there were doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Thus, I say that with a hernia there is heat and fever and violent pains within until the inflammation caused by the excess is calmed; and complete putrefaction occurs at which point the fever, pain, and heat cease.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	However, with a knot, there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains a solid mass that is like a lion's paw in its own sac.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it depends on the color of the body, and its beginning is like a seed, and it grows like a vein, being larger or smaller, and they are of two types: dry or fatty, containing moisture, and the colors of the moisture are spots, as I have said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Thus, when you reach the treatment of a knot, you must extract it and trace it back to its origin using a tool that is called an introductor, as its form will be described in the chapter that follows this one.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And this is the method for investigating abscesses and all kinds of knots: you must take this tool and insert it into the most moist area that you find in the abscess, and you should stir the contents little by little until you know that the tool has penetrated the core.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And then place your hand according to the size of the swelling, and then extract the foreign matter and consider what has been left in the wound.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the current moisture, of whatever color it may be, is external, then you incise it with a superficial section as I have said in other swellings.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no moisture left in the wound from the foreign matter, then you know that it is pus.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And dry it with a section in the shape of a cross as follows:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	Do as you have been taught, and hang it by hooks, and extract the chain from all sides with ease, and protect the skin or sack, if you can, over that, and remove the pus along with the knot.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to extract that pus, and sometimes this happens, and then you must remove it in pieces to ensure that none remains.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	For if any of it remains, whether little or much, the knot will return as before.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that a small part remains from him, then complete the wound with some sharp and strong corrosive powders, bind up the wound, place over it something to form an abscess cautery, and treat that area with another method of cure until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if the knot is large, then cut the two sides of it and treat that area with something that promotes flesh growth.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	But if the pulse is contrary or non-pulsating, then apply and fill the area with a mixture that includes vitriol, leave it in place for two or three days until the wound dries up and the blood's swelling subsides; then return to cutting away what remains of the knot.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLVI.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	On the forms of instruments necessary for section and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Regarding the forms of the instruments used for insertion, there are three types: some are large, some are medium, and some are small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large instrument is as follows:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The method of midwifery is as follows:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of inserting something small is as follows:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	Made of iron, of alum, of properly prepared extremities, so that the instrument quickly penetrates into the swellings.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of the experts, and they are named albedre, and one of those is called berid.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And of three species, for among them are wheat, barley, and a little [amount of something else].
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of great experience, form of it:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of experienced midwife, form of it:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of experiencing pain, form of it:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It seems like this text is written in a language that combines features from Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. I'll translate the sentence provided based on this assumption:
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And you make them round, thick, like large needles with which saddles are sewn, and they are made of citrus wood, or of wood or iron, or silver, and the best ones are those made of citrus wood.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And they make use of black feather experiments, which lead them to open the fistulas in the cavities where reflections are, making those reflections visible with their light.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And of three types, for some are long, and others medium, and others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and the stricture. 
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Form of the large lead ball:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Form of the experienced midwife with lead:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Form of the small lead instrument:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the tumors are of various types, for some are simple ones, which have only one curvature, and they come in three types: large, small, and medium.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And from them come hooked worms, and they are of three types.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And from those come hooked worms having two curves, and they are of three types.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And from them come those having three curves, and they are of three types.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Shape of a large simple worm, as follows:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Shape of a medium simple worm:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of a small simple worm, as follows:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Shape of a large hooked worm:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Shape of a medium hooked worm, as follows:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of a small hooked worm, as follows:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Shape of a large worm having two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Shape of a medium worm having two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Form of an incision having three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the scalpels with which nodules and abscesses are cut and squeezed, and they come in three types: one is large, medium, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Forma de scapel gran:
Forma del scapel migier:	Forma del scapel migier:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Forma de scapel pauc:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The extremities with which the section is made are sharp and the other extremities are not sharp, and they are not placed in such a manner, but rather to cause bleeding during the lancing of the nodes, to avoid cutting into veins or nerves, so that through this the patient may be healed and find some tranquility from the application of heat which comes from the lancing of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of alum, and they come in three varieties: large, medium, and small, as you will see.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of the large magda:
Forma de magda migier:	Form of the medium magda:
Forma de magda pauc:	Form of the small magda:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are made from clay and resemble a ray with which alcohol is made.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And on the sharp end, it is punctured with a hidden spatula and in that way it reaches both inside and outside the parts, as you wish, as you see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of the spatulas, which are hidden between the fingers during the piercing of abscesses so that patients do not feel them, come in three varieties: large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of cupping with which the blood flow is cut off, and it comes in three types; large, medium, and small; the forms are as follows:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut, e sian subtils.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And it is necessary for these kinds of cups to be large, medium, and small, so that through those you can quickly draw off blood when necessary, and at the time when first there is no medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use those for cutting blood throughout the body, and only use them in fleshy areas, such as on the creases of the chest and thighs, and in the creases of the arms, and from the nipples and the belly and the knees, and similar to these in other fleshy moist creases.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And sometimes those instruments are made in other small similar shapes like scissors according to this form; through which the blood is cut off when it is done by phlebotomy, or proper incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes they are made round according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	On the treatment of men's breasts that resemble those of women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Sometimes the breasts of some men become swollen due to the softness that begins with lack of sleep, and then the breasts swell, resembling those of women, and they become pendulous and full of abscesses.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And for the one who requires this treatment, you must incise those areas with a crescent-shaped cut according to this form, from line B inward to line G, and then extract all the thickness, and then fill the wound with flesh-forming medicine, and then sew together the two lips of the wound with stitches, and care for it until it is healed.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if the breast descends into parts and is softened due to its size, as often happens with women, then it should be cut into two larger pieces using two cuts resembling a crescent shape, where each cut is contained within the other at their ends such that the larger line contains the smaller one according to this form from line B to line G. Then extract the chain which is between the two lips of the wound, remove the fat, and administer what we have said about stitching and powders that are necessary for the treatment until it heals.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you cannot complete the incision of what needs to be cut due to the restlessness of the patient and the flow of blood, then you must fill the wound with cloth soaked in corrosive ointment and leave it until it corrodes the membrane of the fat, and then treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Capitol .xlviii.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	Of the puncturing of abscesses that come from small irritations.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These abscesses that come from small irritations are of the kind of scrofula, hard ones, which contain a sac-like structure.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And of those that contain some moisture; those that contain moisture must be incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from line G to line B. And when all the pus within the abscess has been evacuated, then you fill it with old wool and clean the inside on the next day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	Then the wound should be left and treated with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess is of the kind found in glands and scrofula, then you should incise it in the same manner as we have described in the section on scrofula.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	And if the plague has spread to the point of causing putrefaction, then apply a cautery as we have previously described.
Capitol .xlix.	Capitol .xlix.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Of the incision of abscesses that may occur from arteries or veins.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an artery is ruptured, and the bandage that is over it becomes solidified, then spotted abscesses may occur. The signs by which one knows whether inflammation and abscess are from an artery or a vein: for when an abscess is from an artery, it is long and aggregated in the area of the body; and when you press the abscess with your fingers, you feel a rustling sound within it.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is from a vein is round on the surface of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And incision on this abscess is an error, and especially so in those that are near the armpits, the knees, the neck, and many other parts of the body; it is very serious, therefore one should avoid its treatment with a scalpel, and for those located in the extremities or head, it must be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	Moreover, for those that are due to inflammation of the opening of an artery, make an incision along the length in the bandage; then widen the incision with hooks and expose the artery, removing the tunics so that it is revealed.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And then place the needle and make it penetrate through to the other side, and tie off the artery with double thread in two places—this is what I have taught you regarding the extraction of two arteries that are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And then widen the area between two ligaments with a spatula so that all the blood that is there comes out, and let the abscess dissolve.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then administer a treatment that causes pus to form until the ligaments fall away; and then treat it with appropriate ointments until it is healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if the abscess is due to vein rupture, then you must hold as much of the abscess as possible with your hand and tie it off, then insert the needle into the area where you have held it and make it penetrate; use a double thread so that you can pull it through to the other side, and then tie off the abscess with a strong ligature as I have told you, binding both sides with the two ends of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	But if you fear that the thread might be pulled out, then insert the thread with that needle along the entire abscess from the beginning of the first needle insertion, and secure the threads at four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	And dry the abscess in the middle of it where when what is inside comes out, then you incise the excess part of the chain, and leave what remains connected.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then place over it the pillow that you have soaked in wine and oil, and then administer the treatment which is made with plasters and ointments until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	And regarding the abscess that occurs due to a twist or injury of the nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Thus, an abscess can occur in arteries and veins, and similarly, an abscess can occur in the nerves when they are struck or injured, or from excessive work, and by similar causes.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it most often occurs in the areas of the ankles or the heel, or in any place where the joints are painful.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a severe abscess, similar in color to the rest of the body. It often appears in larger areas and when it becomes tight with intensity, the patient may appear stupefied or dazed.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not an abscess that forms on the surface of the body, and therefore the chain of pain does not move forward or backward but affects the entire area.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, that which is in the joints does not need to be wrapped with iron, for it will inevitably result in contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	And if it is in the head or forehead, bind it with a spatum (a type of bandage).
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	If the swelling is small, then take hold of it with forceps and cut it away from the root.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then suspend it with an incision, and drain it, and then remove it; and缝合伤口，然后治愈它直到痊愈。 
Capitol .li.	The line "Capitul .li." appears to be an indication of a chapter or section heading in the text. Given its structure, it likely means:
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	From the incision of an abscess that occurs on the cheek or that occurs in the abdomen. 
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Here is the translation line by line:
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have seen one, and in its belly were two parts which resembled large fungi, and there was no difference between those white, small-sized ones.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And already the lips of those were turned inside out and split open, and moisture was running from them all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	So I incised those and found one to be about eighteen inches long and the other about six inches long.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the procedure for incising them is that you consider whether the patient is moist, and if the color of the tissue is white, moist, and of fine texture; then you incise it with a broad spatula, and have cautery irons ready at hand over the fire, because small pieces of the section should be dried to expel blood; and if the blood flows, cauterize that area.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if the patient is weak and fearful, beware of incision with iron; instead, take fresh lead foil, and bind it to that tissue in the manner we have described; and leave it there for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Then adjust the lead wire at the site of constriction; thus, do not stop binding the larger piece of lead to the tissue until it is severed and falls off on its own.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	And if the tumor is large in size, then at its incision there is some cause for fear and dread, especially in that which is in the abdomen.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	However, it is possible that you can cut away half of it, and then cauterize the area so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then treat the inside so that the wound may heal.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And be careful not to assume that you should incise a tumor which is of dark color, has little sensation, and appears suspicious, for that one is likely cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And bring with you a remedy for kidney issues for this purpose.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter II.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	On the treatment of a protrusion in the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	A protrusion in the navel can be caused by various reasons; it may be due to fractures of the spine which is above the abdomen, and you treat it by sewing or returning the intestine as described in other ruptures; or it may be due to blood flowing from a vein or artery as previously mentioned, or due to trapped wind within it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	And if it is due to a fracture of the spine and protrusion of the membrane, then the color of the swelling resembles the color of the body; and there is less pain, and soon it appears in various locations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then its situation differs significantly from what we have recounted, and as you press on it with your fingers, it becomes hidden, and then returns; and forcefully it comes out by itself, and there is a strong movement of fluids entering and forcefully working.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	And if it is due to moisture, then it is swollen and not hidden when pressed with your hand, nor is it constricted, nor is it hardened.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is due to blood, then with these signs, the abscess appears turning black.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	And if it is due to undigested flesh, then the abscess is heavy, large, and hard, and it settles according to a certain quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	And if it is due to wind (gas), then the touch of it is fierce (literally, lion-like).
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation on it is such that you consider whether the prominence of the navel is due to arterial blood, venous blood, or gas; therefore, one must abstain from treating it, for there is fear and danger as I have taught in the chapter where I discussed abscesses caused by arterial and venous blood.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine or the membrane, then you must order the patient to have their belly exposed and lie extended; then test with your finger around the entire navel; then command them to lie on their back between your hands; then circle around the navel's area with a spatula where you tested with your finger; then extend half of the abscess upward with a large spoon; then bind around the circumference with strong plaster or wax and apply the method of binding properly.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And then introduce the middle of the abscess extended over the membrane and insert your finger into that area to find the intestine; and if you have found or seen it through the membrane, now you should carefully extract and push the intestine back into the abdominal cavity.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found the membrane, now take that with your fingers; and cut away the excess parts of it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, now circle that area; then continue with your procedure. Take two needles and put strong threads through them, and insert the two needles into the circle you have made around the abscess in a crosswise manner, making them penetrate; then hold the abscess tightly at four points on the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, remove the needles and allow the area inside for the extended flesh to rot and fall off by itself; or cut away that which has become thin and will fall, and then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the prominence of the navel is due to flesh growing in it or from moisture, now you must hollow out the abscess as we have said and drain the blood or moisture that you find inside; then treat it with what is necessary to consolidate the area.
Capitol .liii.	Capitol .liii.
De curacio de cranc.	For the treatment of hernia.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already said, in the division, about the type of hernia and in what manner it is treated with medicines, and that it is necessary to apply iron carefully so that it does not become ulcerated; and we have mentioned a hernia generated in the thigh and precautions for its treatment.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancients said that sometimes a hernia can be surgically removed, just as in the case of a hernia located in the breasts or in the thigh, and similar to members allocated for extraction, and especially when it starts small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it is old and large, one should not attempt to treat it, for I have not been able to cure any of these cases nor have I seen others do so, or that it has succeeded in this manner.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation on it is when it is appropriate as we have said, which is that you precede by leaving the patient and purging them of black bile several times, and then apply a poultice if a clear swelling is found.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient with preparations in which they are placed for the operation, and then expose the area with hooks that are necessary for it; and then scoop out from all sides with a good thread to excoriate thoroughly until no cause of the roots remains.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the blood flow, and do not cut that lightly, and squeeze the areas, and clean the thick blood completely with your hand or with an instrument with which it is possible for you among the instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if there is an obstruction of thick blood in a vein or artery, then cauterize that area until the flow of blood ceases, and then treat it with another form of healing until it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	It seems like you've provided a section marker or chapter heading that indicates "Book/Lib 104" in an older style of numbering. If you have more text from this chapter or need further assistance with it, please provide the full text or specify what kind of help you're looking for!
De curacio de ydropici.	This line translates to:
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already discussed, in the division, of the types of water-related edema, and the signs of each type, as well as the treatment with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured with iron is only the type of althitas alone, and it is not treated with iron for the type of timpanists nor for the type of yposarcha, for that would be fatal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have already treated this type of timpanist's edema with medicines and your treatment has not been effective, then consider, for if the patient has already become weakened, or is suffering from another illness such as another form of edema, like in the lungs or abdomen and similar areas, then be cautious about treating them with iron, for there is fear associated with that.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	But if you see the patient as having abundant strength, and they are only suffering from edema without any other illness, and they are neither a child nor an elderly person, then the method of the operation is that you lift the patient between your hands, and another assistant presses the abdomen with their hand to push the water towards the area below the navel, and then take a spiked spatula according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider if the generation of dropsy comes from the intestines, because at this time you should make an incision three finger widths away from the navel on the side towards the pubic area.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	And if the generation of dropsy is due to a disease of the liver, then your incision should be three fingers to the left of the navel.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of it is due to the spleen, then your incision should be on the right side. 
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And it is not necessary for your incision to be on the side on which you wish the patient to lie, so that the excess fluids do not flow to that place freely.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then pierce through the entire chain with the instrument, and insert into that section, and lift your hand with the spatula between the chain and the siphon, and you extract that; and it is about the quantity of a fingernail or so. 
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then pierce the bladder so that the spatula reaches the empty space, which is where the fluid is located. 
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then extract it and introduce an instrument of which this is the form:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	And it resembles a thin silver tube; it is made of silver or iron or brass, at the lower end of which there is a small hole, and on the sides of it are three holes: two on one side and one on the other side; and the tip of it is incised in the manner of a feather, just as you often see.
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the upper end is a ring, so that when the instrument reaches the water, then that ring immediately indicates on the instrument, thus evacuating a certain amount of water, for if you evacuate more than necessary in an hour, it can cause the patient to die due to the resolution of their animal spirit, or you may cause near-death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	But evacuate according to the quantity of the strength of the patient and according to what is indicated to you by the condition of the patient, the strength of their pulse, and their overall health.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And then remove the instrument, and hold back the water which is caused by it being immediately retained by the chain that holds the hole which is on top and twisted to you so that you pierce it in that manner. 
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then repeat the procedure on another day if the patient can tolerate it, and extract a small amount of water, and do this for several days in succession, and be careful not to make any mistakes until only a little water remains.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	And if you fear for the patient, and leave a large amount of water remaining, then treat it by burying it in hot sand, induce sweating in a bath, and expose to the sun for a long time; and treat it with drying medicines until healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize over the stomach, the spleen, and the liver near the extraction of the water, as I have recounted in what precedes.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter V.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	On the treatment of children who are born with unperforated urinary openings.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Sometimes some of the children are born from their mother's womb with their urinary opening not perforated (or it is very narrow or not in its proper place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, it is necessary to cut with a puncture on the newborn using a subtle sharp instrument according to this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then place in the wound a subtle lead clamp and tie it there, and leave it for three days or four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when he wants to urinate, let him be turned sideways and forward; then return him to his original position.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not hold the tube, it is possible that the urine passing over the area will not clear this spot.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	However, for those in whom the passage is narrow, it should be treated with a lead dilator, as we have said, for several days until it is widened.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	However, for those in whom the passage is not in its proper place, as mentioned, the cause is that they are born with the urethra deviated at the tip of the penis, so they cannot urinate properly unless they lift the penis upward with their hand; and this does not allow for normal generation, because the sperm cannot reach the mother correctly, which is a significant disease.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	The method of the operation is that the patient should be placed face down on his back, then extend the tip of his penis with your left hand using forceful traction, and incise the tip of the penis at the site of the obstruction with a sharp spatula, much like the cutting of a quill, or remove some part of it so that the middle becomes similar to the tip of the penis and the passage falls into its proper place as needed.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And be careful in your operation for blood flow, when you often encounter this; and hold the area where you stop the bleeding, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Capitol .lvi.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	From a condition that affects the foreskin at the head of the penis, and from corruption, blackening, and adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Motàs veguadàs accidèys aquest albater en la verguà e es eminència de carn làga.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And of those, one is malignant and the other is non-malignous.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	And for the non-malignant one, you must suspend it with a fine thread and cut within so that it is completely removed; then apply a piece of cloth soaked in Egyptian ointment over it; afterwards, treat it with a healing ointment until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the ulcer is malignant and of a leathery color, then you must apply a cautery near its beginning and its root.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	And if the ulcer is on the foreskin of the uncircumcised penis, and one part of the ulcer is inside the foreskin while the other part is outside, then you must remove the part of the ulcer that is inside at its beginning until it is stabilized; then treat the part that is outside, because when you treat both the ulcer and the foreskin together, it is not certain that it will not be torn.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And we have observed accidents in the genitals and foreskin, such as blackening and corruption; therefore, you must remove all that is already blackened or about to corrupt or already corrupted; then apply a line over it with honey, which is mixed with flour from ground pomegranate rind and finely crushed and sifted ash.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And then treat that with the other cure until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	And if there is a flow of blood, then administer a lunar cautery in the following manner:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	For a beneficial cautery is useful for two conditions simultaneously, namely for blood flow and for plague when it is corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the penis is corroded and completely destroyed, then you must insert a lead catheter into the foreskin so that the patient urinates through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adherence does not occur except in one whose foreskin is tight, and circumcision is not required; and when adherence occurs due to plague or abscess), you must gently separate with a blunt spatula until the bond is dissolved and the head of the penis is completely released.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to distinguish those precisely, then you must gently separate with a spatula some of the cause from the head of the penis and the foreskin. This is because the foreskin, when it is thin, can be easily pierced slightly due to its thinness.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a sharp and thin instrument, which has already been soaked in cold water so that it does not stick again.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then it should be treated with astringent wine until it is healed.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter LVI.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	On the cleansing of children and the treatment of what may occur to those who have been circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution to discontinuity like other wounds; however, since it is of our doing and by our will, and those for whom it is properly performed are children, it is necessary that we assign the best procedure and the least harmful method to ensure their health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books because it was not part of their laws. This has been acquired through experience, which is why I have found that most practitioners and surgeons use circumcision and cleansing with a lancet and probes; they also apply bandages with salt and anointment with oil.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And with the cleansing which is performed by leeches, and it is digital, of which barbers use, the incision at the end of the male member is not secured, for fear that they enter into its channel.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	And in the operation with a nail, if you forcefully open it, you corrupt your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the umbilical cord of the child is short by nature, and many times it is born in such a way that it does not require modification, and I have seen this.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	Regarding the modification that is done with scissors and tying with thread, the goodness, my experience reveals to me, is that the scissors have proportional blades, so that the sharpness on top is the same as the sharpness on the bottom; and thus when you press your hand it causes two proportional sharp edges to incise according to a comparison in one motion; and compression of the thread is done with a figure containing the cord of the penis from all sides, with which there is no error at all.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the method of the first operation is that you should keep the child mostly still, especially if it is one who understands a little, so that you only tie the thread on its penis just enough, and leave it there until the next day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	Then make the child happy in every way that is possible to you so that it receives comfort and understanding.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	Then have the child sit between your hands preparedly, and do not be careless; and hide the scissors in your hand or behind your back so that the child does not see them or any of the other instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then insert your hand into the penis and blow into the urethra, and pull that inside so that the head of the penis is set back, and then clean it from what dirt has been added to it.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then mark the area with a double layer of wax, and then place a second ligature slightly below the first one, and then use your finger to press and indicate the ligation site firmly, and incise between the two ligatures.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then lift the urethra slightly and extract the head of the penis; and then let the blood flow little by little, as it is better; and apply powder over it, and place a cloth over the powder that has been spread with pigeon droppings cooked in warm water mixed with fresh olive oil; and leave that on until the next day; and treat it with healing methods until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the scissors for modification is as follows:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	Let one end of the scissors be uncut and the other end be cutting, so that the nail's edge is not lifted, and the length of the two sharp ends should be equal to the length of two equally sized handles.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	And the error in purification is that you completely or partly evade the intrinsic chain when you should incise.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, it is necessary that you stretch the skin of the area with your fingernail before the inflammation appears at the site and that you incise it according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your nail, then extract that with tweezers and incise it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	And if three days have passed and the swelling from the inflamed penis remains, then you wait until the abscess softens, and drain it easily, and incise it as you are prepared to do.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And be careful of the head of the penis, for it should not be affected by this.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And therefore treat it with what consolidates the wound from powders, which we have recommended in the section on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is incised too much on the scrotum, and you follow the divisions above, this will not harm him.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And moreover, treat it with what we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter LVIII.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to stones or frozen blood, or dirt or growths, and similar to what we have said about the methods of treatment in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved and there is retention of matter due to a stone that is already in the neck of the bladder, then the patient must be bent over their knees.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And then position the feet of that person on their back and extend their abdomen from the part above their back, and the patient holds their arm as much as is possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Therefore, when the neck of the bladder is forced to expel the stone to the rear parts, thus the urine is released.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it is not dissolved by what we have said and the cause becomes very severe for the patient, then you must administer extraction from him using an instrument called a syringe, of which this is the form: It should be made of silver and its tube should be thin like that of a bird's quill with a subtlety of one finger in length similar to a palm and a half, at the end of which there should be a fine tube.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the method of urination extraction is as follows: take the folded cloth and tie it tightly at one end with wool or cord; insert the ends of the cloth into the opening of the syringe, and cut off any excess part of the wool with scissors if necessary, but insert it forcefully into the tube. Then suck on the syringe with your mouth and use egg white [as a lubricant or seal].
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And place the patient on the sheet, and anoint the bladder and penis with moist oils, olive oil, and water.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then gently insert the syringe until it reaches the root of the penis; and then bend the penis upwards at the junction of the pubis; and then push the syringe in further; and then continue to push it until it reaches the bladder, and the patient should feel that it has reached the intended void. However, this process is not always done according to this order, but rather depends on the path which goes with tortuosity [meaning弯曲的路径].
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then stretch the bile with wool little by little, for urine soaks the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Then extract that and use the urine for treatment, and apply a catheter; do not stop doing this and use a catheter until the bladder is evacuated and the patient finds relief.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter .59. 
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Of the quality of bladder irrigation with cleistochisma and similar instruments which are appropriate for this.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When you encounter ulceration or abscess in the bladder, or congealed blood within it, or obstructed pus, and you wish to distill water and medicines into it, then use an instrument called a clampcedra, and this is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	And here is the translation of the given line:
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that place three wounds: two from one side, thus as you please.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning is the concave area, in which what is expelled is located, and according to the quantity that obstructs it, its addition, within which when any cause pulls from the humidities, it is pulled, and when it is expelled, with this it is pulled, and when it is expelled long, according to how it makes clampcedra, with which naphtha is poured into the battles of sea.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, when you want to extract humidity from the bladder, insert the end of a tube into the moisture, and pull with that what is pushed up into the parts above, for the moisture is drawn into the cavity of the tube.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	Then insert the end of the tube into the urethra as we have recommended in the circumcision; and then push the moisture with what you are pushing, for that moisture reaches the bladder immediately, and the patient feels it.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The form of the catheter that is used to catheterize the bladder is as follows:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it should be made of silver or bronze, with one end resembling a small feather, and leave a hollow canal inside.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	Then take the bladder of an animal, and place within it the moisture you want to introduce into the bladder, and then tie both ends tightly with double thread, and warm that moisture over fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	Then insert the end of the catheter into the urethra.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then press your hand over the bladder with moisture, applying steady pressure until the patient feels that this moisture has reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	And if the bladder is not present, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle out of it; and pierce it entirely around its circumference; then insert strong wax into those holes, so that it is filled; then attach the circle in such a way as to be attached to the syringe, so that you can place it in the moisture, oils, and waters that you want.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then attach it to the instrument and use it in the same way as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter 60.
De extraccio de peyra.	On the extraction of stones.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already discussed in the division the types of stones and their treatment with medicines, and the difference between stones formed in the kidneys and those formed in the bladder, and the signs of each.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have described the stone in which the operation is done by hand, and section.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that which is lodged in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And I am narrating this with clear exposition and abbreviation.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore, it is said that the stone generated in the bladder mostly affects children; and one of the signs of this is that the urine excreted from the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety, and appears as sand; and the patient rubs his penis, often feels pain, and then it becomes erect; and with this, you understand some of these symptoms.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And surgery is the treatment for children of that age who have reached fourteen years; and it is a difficult treatment in older people.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	However, in younger individuals, it may be treated with this method because they are among those who can recover.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And for the one in whom the stone is larger, the treatment is more difficult; and if it is small, it is the opposite of that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, to proceed with the treatment of this condition, we begin by cleansing the patient with catheters that extract all the pus present in their intestines; because that pus often prevents the discovery of the stone during examination.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then the patient is lifted by their feet and shaken and jolted gently so that the stone descends into the neck of the bladder, or jumps to another place several times.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then apply that ointment between your hands prepared, and the patient's hands should hold their own genitals, so that the entire bladder is made to incline towards the lower parts.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then wash that area and clean it all thoroughly.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Therefore, if you feel the stone in the space, then you should immediately proceed with surgery on it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you cannot remove it entirely with your touch, then you must anoint your left index finger with oil, if the patient is a child, or your middle finger if they are a mature adult, and insert that into their anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And wash the stone inside while keeping your finger there.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And gently guide that stone little by little into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And then press on that area with your finger, and push that out towards the outer parts away from the site of the incision.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand; and command another minister to extend the testicles upwards with his right hand, and with his other hand hold the skin that is below the testicles, at a distance from the site where the incision is made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then insert a blade vertically, the form of which is as follows:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And then divide what is between the anus and the testicles, not in the middle but closer to the left thigh; and let the incision be made over that stone with your finger inside the anus, and make a transverse incision so that the outer part of the cut is wide and the inner part narrow according to how much the stone protrudes as possible, and no more, because you will push with your finger which is in the anus against the stone, making it come out easily.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that some stones have angles and edges, which makes their expulsion difficult because of this.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And from that, this resembles a grain, and it is round, and it is made from the light secretion.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Therefore, if it is that which causes pain and inflammation, apply [it] to the fissure.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not thus sufficiently spread out, then you must bind over that area, or press upon that area decently with the extremity which should be like a file used to scrape on stone, and do not slip off of it; or insert into that area an instrument with a subtle curved extremity.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	And if you cannot act upon that area, then slightly widen the passage, and if you see a flow of blood, bind tightly with powdered vitriol.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if there is more than one stone, then at the beginning you should press your hand to the opening of the bladder, and then incise over it; then gently push a little toward it. And similarly do this if they are more than two particles.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the stone is very large, then it is unwise to incise it with a large cut, for you cause one of two things to happen to the patient: either they die or they become subject to continuous urine leakage, because the area does not fully heal.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	But administer the expulsion of what is embedded inside, or extract it in pieces through the fracture using forceps.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Therefore, once you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with pieces of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen it thus.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place upon that cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in oiled olive oil and warm water, so that the swelling may be softened by heat.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And then tilt the patient back onto their collarbone, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when you have loosened it, wash the area with water and ointment, then treat it with diafinicon ointment and diabazilicon ointment until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	But if in the wound you encounter an abscess that is hot, hardening, and corrosive, and it appears as though the blood is congealed in the bladder causing urinary obstruction (and this is known by the discharge of blood with urine), then insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if left, it will cause corruption and putrefaction of the bladder.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and apply an opposing treatment to all kinds, using what is appropriate for its healing until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And throughout the entire healing process, you must keep both thighs open and apply the medicines that are placed on the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and is in the meat of the penis, embedded within it, causing urine discharge to be obstructed, then treat it with what I have recommended before resorting to surgery, as many times this condition is wrongfully accused of needing surgery; and now I have explained this, which is that you should take a smooth iron probe, of which this is the form:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	of triangular shape, sharp, inserted into wood.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And then take honey, and apply it with that to the penis after removing the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then insert the tool into the penis, piercing easily until the piercer reaches the stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And rotate the piercer with your hand on that stone little by little, and you will penetrate through the stone until the other side is reached; for the urine will be released immediately.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then press your hand on the part where the stone breaks outside of the penis, for it is fractured there and expelled with the urine, and the patient is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	But if this treatment is not suitable for you due to some reason that prevents you from performing it, then apply honey below the stone and more honey above the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then make an incision over the stone on that penis between two bindings.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then extract it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then loosen the bandage and modify the clotted blood that has formed in the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to have a bandage under the stone except to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other bandage above it otherwise, because when the bandage is loosened near the protrusion of the stone, the chain returns to its place and covers the wound.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for this reason, when you loosen the bandage above, you must lift the chain to the parts above, or you should return and complete your action in such a way that it covers the wound as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter LXI.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the extraction of stones from women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Stones in women rarely form.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	But if a stone does occur in any of them, then the cure is difficult, and it is prohibited by many methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One reason is that the woman's body is often delicate.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that you do not find a woman well knowledgeable who would confess to the doctor when she is chaste, or is among women having husbands.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is that you cannot find a woman who knows this art well, especially this hand operation.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the location of the section over the stone in women is far from the location of the stone, so you need a more extensive incision, and there is fear in that.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	And if necessity forces you to do this, then it is necessary for you to take a woman who is well-versed in medicine, though she is rarely found.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	But if you are deprived of that, then seek someone who is quite skilled and subtle, or present a woman experienced in women's affairs, or a woman who has knowledge of this part of the art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Thus present that person, and command them to do everything you instruct, starting with the examination of the stone; this is done to determine if the woman is a virgin, then they must insert their finger into her genital area and examine the stone. 
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Therefore, if you find that [condition], compress it with your finger, and then command the patient to urinate on that spot.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	If she is not pregnant, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the patient's vagina and explore for the stone, while placing her left hand on the bladder, and compress it with good pressure.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Therefore, if that stone is found, it must be gradually extracted from the opening of the bladder towards the lower parts with the aid of their strength until it reaches the area near the thigh.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	Then make an incision at that location from the middle of the vagina to the area near the thigh, whichever part is blocked, and push the stone into that part, ensuring the finger does not slip off the stone while doing so.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the incision should be small at the beginning; then insert the probe into that incision, and if the stone is felt, enlarge the incision according to the amount needed for the stone to be expelled from there.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And know that there are various types of stones: some are small and large, some are sharp and rough, some are long and round, and some have ridges.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore you know which spices are for it by what you mean regarding what you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you see blood flow, apply crushed vitriol to the location and leave it there for an hour until the bleeding is stopped, and then continue with your procedure once the stone has been expelled.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And prepare with you the instruments which are used in the extraction of stones from men, so that you may be assisted by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you see a flow of blood and know that the bleeding comes from the artery that has been cut, then you apply powder to the area and press it with pillows and tight bandages, and do not repeat this; and leave the stone and do not extract it, for by doing so the patient will surely die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	Then treat the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	When the sharpness of the blood has subsided over several days and the area has dried, then you return to your operation before the stone is completely expelled.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter sixty-two.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On the section of an incarcerated hernia.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	An incarcerated hernia is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white sac, which is beneath the cord containing the testicles, and this sac is called the tunica vaginalis.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And sometimes it is in the proper fat tissue that nature prepares for the part of the egg, between which it is cooked and has already become another egg; and it is the chain of genetic material between the white part we have mentioned, and this is not anything but sperm.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which affects the groin area, because this material accumulates in those areas, and sometimes it occurs due to blows inflicted on the groins.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this humidity has various colors, for the color of it may incline to yellow or bloody, or red, or it is black and feculent, or it is clear white, and this is what exists.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which it is known where this aggregation of water is as follows: for if it is in the white membrane we have mentioned, then the swelling is round declining somewhat in length like an egg shape, and the genus appears, for the moisture contains that from all sides.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the moisture is in the proper fascia itself, then the swelling is round with parts of the egg, and therefore it is thought to be another kind of egg.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the testicles and the white membrane, then apply a poultice to it.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And when you want to know the color of the moisture, then observe the color of the moisture in the abscess through a probe whose shape is described beforehand; and according to what appears on the tip of the probe, judge what is inside it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore, when we come to the treatment of anemia, then it is necessary to command the patient to be bled if that is possible for you, and empty their body thoroughly.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	Then let the patient lie down on their back on some kind of support raised slightly, and place soft cloths underneath them.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	Then sit on the left side of the patient and command an assistant to stand on their right side, who should extend their hand from one side to the testicles and to the part near the navel.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	Then take a broad spatula and split the scrotum in the middle along its length, close to the penis.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And let the incision be made equally distant from the line that you should draw on the skin of the genitals, until it reaches the white circumference.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And incise that area, observe, and be careful so that you do not penetrate too deeply; and your incision with which you make the incision should be suspended with the most delicate and subtle probing according to the extent possible for you. 
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then pierce the bladder full of water with a wide opening, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate the two lips of the incision with forceps, and stretch the bladder upwards; do not touch the chain containing the genitalia, and incise the bladder in whatever manner is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And incise it entirely or in pieces, especially its thin side, because if you do not examine the incision meticulously, there is no guarantee that the water will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	However, if you process the area outside of its chain during the time of your operation, then when you have completed the incision of the bladder, return it inside, and then suture the two lips of the genitalia's chain together, and then treat it as you would other wounds until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the bladder corrupted by another disease, then you must tie off the vessels that are near the suspenders, remove the bladder, and then treat it as we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	And if the water is added in two separate parts similarly, then know that there are two hernias; therefore, incise that part equally as you have done in the other one; and if it appears to you that it is an operation, then do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then you clean the blood and insert into the incisions wool soaked in oil or oiled wool; and place over that other wool which you have soaked in wine and oil, and spread that over both groins and the navel of the belly; and place above folded cloths and pillows, and tie those above with a bandage according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And then two cloths are taken and filled with carded wool according to this shape; and the ends with which pressure is applied are made either of wood or damp wool, and they are attached with a structure in the waistband of the trousers, and one end should go from the buttocks between the two, and the second at the part of the crotch, and two ends over each thigh and two other ends over both knees, and all the structure is tightened in the waistband of the trousers.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with cautery instead of surgery with a knife; and you should take a thin scalpel-like cautery and incise the chain of the groins with it, and ignite it as we have recommended between which the white membrane containing the water is exposed, and then you take a cautery according to this form:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	And it resembles Greek letters.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	Then pierce it with that instrument, and heat it until all the moisture is expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	Then extend the instrument with hooks, and squeeze with hooks, and carefully heat with a subtle cautery; and cut that part as much as possible until you remove it all; be careful of the area so that the fire does not touch it.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is safer and causes less bleeding, and is better than an operation with incision.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if this operation causes complications such as swelling at the time of incision or cautery, or excessive bleeding, then you must treat whatever complication arises for you, with the appropriate treatment as mentioned.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the patient is weak and does not expect to endure a second operation due to its horror, then administer puncture as I recommend here; this is when you are certain, based on what we have said about the signs, that the hernia is watery.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	When it is necessary that you make the patient sit on some elevated chair, then pierce the abscess in its lowest part with a broad spatula, and place the incision according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And let the opening be wide so that all the water can flow out completely.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Then place something over the area and bind it there, so that the remaining water can flow out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Then care for it until the plague is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if there is an obstacle to the discharge of water at that time, you should pierce it: this is done only when white panicle (material) in the orifice of the wound causes an obstruction and prevents the outflow of water. At this point, you must introduce a probe or instrument into the wound with which the water from dropsy is extracted, the form of which has been described previously; or apply a small device to the compression of the wound.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And know that the water returns and accumulates again after about six months or around that time; and when it accumulates, then it should be pierced according to the same method, so that the patient may thus spend their days.
Capitol .lxiii.	The given text appears to be in an archaic form of a Romance language that is a mix of Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. It seems like you want me to continue translating line by line from similar sentences.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	Of surgery on a fleshy hernia and its cure.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in the surgery of this hernia, there is fear of causing fatal harm in major procedures; therefore, in my opinion, it is better to dismiss it and be saved by the better option.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I recall the operation on that and the specifics of the abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Thus, I say that abscesses form in bodies where the veins are involved, and this happens for various reasons: either due to an excess of sharp bitterness that is poured into the veins, or due to percussion.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and it is not accompanied by pain, and it is a severe abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And often the abscess is stone-like, of which the color is dark, and there is no sensation in it.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes it is caused by the constriction of the arteries, and by the inflammation of those, as has already been recalled, or by the inflammation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	And here is the translation of the given sentence:
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	And that which is caused by the inflammation of a vein is not dispersed, and any cause should lead to compression with the mentioned methods.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that in this kind of case a section may be made and on the other flesh; thus you incise the chain of the testicles, then stretch the scrotum upwards to its parts above, extract the white spermatic cord from it, release the suspensory ligament of the vessels, tie them off, and then incise the suspensory ligament after you have freed it entirely from all parts of the scrotum.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	And if the scrotum is already consolidated with those inflamed tissues, then you must extract the scrotum and incise it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adhesion due to some cause in the spermatic cord, or between the vessels, then you must free all of that adhesion and incise it with a circular incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	But if there is a growth of flesh in the area of the adhesion that is behind, then you must incise all of that which belongs to it and extract the scrotum as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, once your operation is complete, fill the wound with wool infused in rose oil and wine; then treat it with other treatments until it heals.
Capitol .lxiv.	Capitol .lxiv.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	For the given line:
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this illness, there is fear due to the memory of what precedes it.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, we must mention the operation that was performed first.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And it says that you must make the patient sit on an elevated chair; then pull up the suspensor of the testicles to their respective parts; then tie the strings of the genitals with threads using probes that are proven for this purpose; and let other assistants help you, and stretch them vigorously.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	Then make an incision with a sharp spatula across the right side of the vessels so that the vessels are exposed within.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	Then squeeze from all sides as we have described in the extraction of arteries, which are located in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	Then insert a needle with double thread into those areas, and tie one end of the thread at the front where you made the incision, and tie the other end at the back.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then incise in the middle according to the length of the body with a straight cut, and extract what has been added by the foul and corrupted humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then treat the wound with a method used for other wounds where you want pus to be generated so that veins are cleansed, in which you would apply one of two types of ointment, for it is not harmful by doing so.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	But if you accidentally affect all the vessels, then it is necessary that the testicles be extracted or that the testicles cease functioning along with the vessels, because they are deprived of all nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and that they are removed, or that they cease so that they are not useful anymore.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter .65.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Here is the translation of the provided line:
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The appearance of this hernia is due to a section that descends from the spine extending over the abdomen from the area near the inguinal ring of the abdominal wall, because the intestines descend through that rupture into one of the intestinal segments.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the abdomen or due to exertion by the patient, and these two types occur for various reasons: from blows, from jumps, from shouting, from lifting something heavy, or from similar causes.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of this condition, when it is due to consumption (or tuberculosis), is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time, and does not happen suddenly; it is an abscess that forms within where the preon (possibly meaning 'windpipe' or 'airway') constricts the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of it is when there is a dryness in the abdomen, for at the beginning it causes a sudden and violent pain; and there appears an inflammation different from the usual swelling of the region nearby, and this is due to the projection of the intestine, and its body extends beyond the abdomen.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And sometimes it happens that the intestine pushes through the membrane, and this kind of intestinal hernia is called zirbal.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And sometimes it happens due to gas, and sometimes it runs through a split in the intestine, where it gets trapped, causing great discomfort to the patient, and sometimes it leads to severe and intensified pain, especially when pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of this kind of illness with iron, there is fear, so it must be avoided in that case.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the method of the operation for this is to command the patient to push the intestine back into its cavity with their hand; if it obeys and returns, then lay them on their back between your hands and lift their chest.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then grasp the cord that extends above the spermatic cord, and cut through the entire length of the spermatic cord; then insert hooks into the edges of the incision according to what is needed to open the incision with those.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the section is according to the quantity that you are able to remove from it so that the pus may be expelled.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then expel that scrotal sac in which the cord of the testicles lies, until the white hard capsule of each part is revealed.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	And when you insert your finger into the area where the testicle is located, between the white capsule that lies below the spermatic cord and the second capsule, separate it from the adhesion that is in the part behind the scrotum.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then hold the spermatic cord with your hand towards the outside, and with this action extend the white capsule upwards with your left hand, and lift the scrotum with the capsule to the section area; and command the assistant to stretch the scrotum upwards while you separate the adhesion behind it completely.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And use your fingers to ensure there is no cause for the intestine being wrapped in the hard white capsule.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	But if you find any cause for it, then push that part into the abdomen below.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then take a needle with thick thread made of seven threads, and insert it through the rear of the white capsule, which is below the spermatic cord at the section area; and then make an incision at the ends that you raise from the thread until they are four threads apart, and arrange some of them in a figure resembling a cross; and bind with that the capsule we have mentioned that lies below the spermatic cord with a strong suture on both sides.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then wrap the extremities of the veins and bind them tightly to ensure that none of the vessels that nourish those areas can pass any harmful substance, so that an abscess does not form here as a result.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And place another ligature according to the first ligature, about three fingers away; and then from these two ligatures leave out the part that is below the scrotum, as much as the size of a finger, and cut all the remaining part in a circular manner, and remove the egg.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then cut into the part of the scrotum where the testicles are located, in such a way that blood and pus flow out, just as we have recommended in what we have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then apply wool submerged in oil and place it on the wound; administer the liniment that we have recommended (and sometimes white cyphac is cauterized, which we mentioned at the beginning of the section on blood flow, because such accidents often occur) and leave the liniment until it falls off by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	But if the binding of it is delayed, then bathe it with warm water and apply it according to what we have said until it falls off.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the wound with the other methods of treating wounds until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter LXVI.
De hernia ventosa.	On Windy Hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this windy hernia, no one has been bold enough to attempt its cure with iron (surgery).
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first ones said that it is done in such a way as we have recounted in the hernia treatment using thread; which means that you tie the vessels near the section where it is easy to do so; and then dry out in the middle area around the abscess, opening it up with something, allowing the vessels to fall inside.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And treat the plague as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter LXVII.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Of the dislocation that occurs in the ankles.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Sometimes, as we have said, there is a rupture in the ankles, and you must examine the area.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And do not attribute any cause of the hernias to the groin; and if you do, it is minimal; and it returns at all times. 
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	And if the time with this is prolonged, a precise incision is made in the sphincter where the intestine descends into the anus; and this happens due to the stretching of the sphincter which occurs in the bent position as we have said, which causes the sphincter to stretch, then it becomes softened and the area becomes inflamed and protrudes.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the treatment of it is with cautery, as was mentioned earlier in the description of it.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And sometimes it is treated with iron in the following manner: the patient lies on their back between the healer's hands, and then the area of the rupture that is inflamed and protruding is dried by cutting across its width according to the quantity of three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then strengthen the white sphincter that is below the cord until it is uncovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the probe and place it over the protruding area of the sphincter, and press it against the front of the abdomen.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then sew the two protruding areas at the end of the sphincter probe together using sutures.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then extract the end of the intestine, and do not incise the entire circumference, nor extend the wound, nor cause any other harm as I will teach you in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then treat that with the treatment of wounds, and when you incise the abscesses, cleanse that area and restore the wound before it solidifies; for the incision is contracted and the prominence of the rupture is not properly adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cautery is better in this area, for it is more conducive to healing.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter LXVIII.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On the softening of the spermatic cord.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Often, the spermatic cord is softened in some men because the flesh between it is softened, and this is attributed to its care.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore, it is necessary for one who is skilled in its treatment to make the patient lie on their back, and incise the entire softened cord over the natural cord; then sew the two edges together with sutures.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you want, at the beginning, soften the excess of the loosened chain with three or four boilings and with a firm suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then cut between the sutures; and then treat for the healing of other wounds until it is healed and the pus has drained. 
Capitol .lxix.	Capitol .lxix.
De castracio.	From the context provided and the similarity of the language to medieval medical Latin with influences from Romance languages, here is an attempt at translating the given line:
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that in our law castration is excommunicated, but for a reason it has been deemed legal for me to remind you of it in this book; and there is no need to remember it except in two ways, of which the first is so that it may be part of the doctor’s knowledge when questioned about it, knowing the cure for one who is affected by it; and the other way is that we often have a need for castration of other animals for our own benefit from them, such as horses, bulls, pigs, and similar animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore I say that castration is performed in two ways: either by attrition or by cutting through incision.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	But in the one that is done by attrition, the method of the operation is to make the animal sweat with hot water until its testicles are softened and loosened and hang down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	Then take them with your hand while they are still relaxed and do not let them appear when you touch them.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	But in castration performed by incision and cutting, you must hold the animal and press the cord of its testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And then apply the suspensory bandage, and make an incision on each bone with a cut between two joints. 
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then incise that pus which you have squeezed out.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not leave any cause on those with epilepsy except the subtle epilepsy which is on the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of castration is better, which is done by atrophy, for atrophy leaves no cause from the testicles for the animal to desire copulation.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And then treat the plague before it is healed. 
Capitol .lxx.	Capitol .lxx.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	For the given sentence:
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And sometimes that urine flows from the area of the scrotum where the testicles are located.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	But in women, it is different: the part of the woman above the penis-like structure resembles two male testicles somewhat to the right side and outward, similar to the foreskin of a man and two testicles. 
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the cure is of three types: two for men and one type for women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is necessary that you incise those tight muscles before the swelling from that subsides, and then treat them with the cure for other ailments.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second type for men, where you urinate from an area in the region of the testicles, there is neither cure nor operation for it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	On swelling and protruding flesh caused by conditions in women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Swelling appears quickly and is tightly bound due to natural causes before it becomes strained, and the observation is made; sometimes it is enlarged in some women to such an extent that it spreads similarly as in men and even extends to intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Then it is necessary that you hold the excess swelling with your hand or with a tool and incise it.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not hesitate to make the incision, especially near the area of the groin, so that it does not result in a flow of blood.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And then treat that with the healing of wounds until it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	New-born flesh is flesh that grows in the wounds of the mother until it fills them, and strongly extends to the outer parts resembling a tail (and for this reason some early doctors called it “tail disease”); therefore, we must incise it as we would a lentil, and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter LXXII.
De curacio de alratica.	On the treatment of gout.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Gout is a condition where the neck of the femur is not perforated, or the passage is small. 
E es o natural o accidental.	And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	And accidental is due to illness that has preceded it, and that which is caused either by improperly adjusted flesh or by a subtle or thick humor.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it is caused either in the area of the womb, or on its sides, or in its upper pus, or in its lower pus, and prohibit coitus, pregnancy, and childbirth, and especially prohibit menstruation. 
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the knowledge of that is obtained by observing the midwife, if the obstruction is apparent, it is proclaimed; but if it is not apparent, then you seek that with your fingers or with a probe.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	And if the obstruction is due to subtle phlegm and is located near the two lips, then you should puncture and break that obstruction.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And you should place cushions over both labia, and then place your index fingers of both hands inside.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman should lie on her back, her thighs spread apart, and then spread the two lips with force so that that subtle barrier is broken and the obstruction is opened.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take wool and soak it in oil, place that on the area, and guard it well for a day so that the incised area is not disturbed.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	And if the abscess is large and thick, then you must incise it with a broad scalpel or with a myrtle leaf.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	But if the obstruction is due to flesh, then suspend it with a hook, and incise it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And use the medicines that stop blood flow from bites, such as hemlock, dragon's blood, and copperas, applied with egg white.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a wide lead cannula so that the wound is not lightly sealed.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And keep it for several days and administer dried calf's milk.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And then it should be treated with another consolidation treatment until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes it happens in the native formation of other flesh, and then you must incise it according to this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	But if this is due to a chronic abscess, in the case of a chronic abscess that is in the breast, no iron should be used in any way.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Capitol .lxxiii.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	For the given sentence:
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament;
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already said in the division the types of those and the signs of those, and to say thus those that receive cure and those that do not receive cure.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore, I say that hemorrhoids and tumors when they are inside the rectum of the mother (possibly referring to the large intestine) and do not appear to the senses, in those cases no surgery should be performed with iron (meaning surgical instruments).
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those that are in the openings of the womb on which one feels pain, are those that are treated.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And it is necessary that you place the woman in cold water and then extend the thigh with scissors or with a rough cloth, and incise them with knives.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then sprinkle over those wounds the flow of blood with one of the astringent powders such as mastic and similar to these.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then foment the patient's feet for an hour, and then place them in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the flow of blood persists, then let her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate peels and walnuts and similar items.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And then take flour of oats, mix it with honey and sweet wine, and make a poultice with it to apply on his back.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the blood is congealed, it is good; and if not, attach two cupping vessels and perform scarification on the nipples.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take wool, soak it in the juice of coriander or in the juice of arnica or in the juice of plantain with fermented wine, and apply it to the area; and then treat the area with ointments until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	Take care to note the contents, which are of strict observation; you should inscribe what appears to you according to what I have said in a similar manner. 
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And care for that which is inside so it may be healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	It seems like you've provided a chapter or section identifier from an old text, specifically "Capitul .lxxiv." which translates to "Chapter LXXIV" in English. This indicates that the following content would be the seventy-fourth chapter of whatever work is being referenced.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	Of puncture or accidental injury in the major area.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already described these diseases and the types of them and their signs, and their treatments in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And I must say in this treatise about an abscess that appears in the breast when it is one of those abscesses that collect pus, and if you want to know in what manner the operation on it with iron is done.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Then you must consider whether the pain of the abscess at its beginning is acute with percussion and phlegm and fever, and sometimes there is reddening and if you press on it the sensation persists, then do not treat it with puncture, and cure it with what aids maturation until the acuteness of the symptoms ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And now you must have the woman sit on a chair that has two seats; and recline her on her back and position her feet towards the lower part of the abdomen, and spread her thighs apart, and place her arms below her head, and bind them with a suitable bandage.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	Then the midwife should follow the correct method and administer the instrument with which the opening of the mother is widened, the form of which will be described in the following sections.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And when you want to administer this instrument, you should insert the tip of the instrument into the opening of the woman's womb, and ensure that the part of the instrument inserted into the womb does not exceed the opening of the womb and injure the patient.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	But if the instrument is larger than the opening of the womb, then you must place pillows on the tissue of the womb's opening so that it prevents any instrument from entering the opening of the womb.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And you must place the thread that runs through the instrument of the neck above, and the assistant should hold the instrument and twist the thread until the opening of the womb is dilated.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the inflammation appears and is touched with the hand, it feels swollen and moist; then you must dry that area by scraping off the top of it with a spatula.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the pus is drained, then you must apply to the wound a cloth soaked in rose oil or anointed oil that has some astringency; and place the compress on the incision at the opening of the womb.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And place outside the womb and on the perineum clean wool soaked in water in which mallows have been boiled.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then it should be treated for about two days with an ointment that you should apply until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And sometimes the wound and the infected area are washed with water and honey, then with water in which there is boiled root of iris or longwort, and then return to the ointment.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the plague is within the large intestine, then you must abstain from treating it with iron, instead curing it as we have said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Capitol .lxxv.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach the midwives in what manner the unhealthy embryos are treated when they present a non-natural figure.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	It is necessary that the midwife recognize at the beginning the figure of a natural childbirth by its signs, and this is when you see the woman expressing the parts and desiring to smell the air, and because of this she is excited by what is above her in labor, and hastens the emergence of the embryo; then you know that this birth is according to a natural figure, and it is the emergence of it with its head first, and the second part with either hanging or suspended from the navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore, when you see those signs, then it is necessary to compress the belly so that the embryo descends easily; for when they descend with their head first, the second part follows, and it should be cleansed of those excesses with proper cleansing.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	However, that which differs from this birth is unnatural and not praiseworthy, for when the embryo emerges with its feet first and its body comes out in front of its head and feet, or one hand comes out, or a foot, or its head and one hand come out, or towards its abdomen, and it is quickly turned on its neck, resembling those unpraiseworthy figures.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	When there is a necessary reason, it is essential for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all those matters, and that she guard against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And I am showing all the figures of those [conditions], and what nature is in them by which they are signified by this and stand upon this.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the fetus is placed on its head by natural movement, and if it is strongly positioned in a difficult part for the woman and sometimes the strength of the fetus is already weakened, then you should perform this procedure, or allow women to have it, and evaporate its semen with fenugreek juice and with moist herbs.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then insert the midwife between the small of their back and split it with the second tool, or use her nail to scrape out whatever moisture is inside.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the woman's abdomen until the fetus descends.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	And if it does not descend, then the woman must be treated with a mixture of psyllium mucilage and fenugreek mucilage.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	Then command the midwife to press and induce sneezing with condiments; place your mouth and nose over theirs for about an hour, as the fetus will come out soon. 
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if both ends of the wound are swollen at the beginning, then you must reduce those with ease little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	And if [the patient] does not respond to treatment, then lay the woman on a chair and lift her feet up, and then lower the chair to the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall due to the jolt.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the ends are not brought together and the wound becomes worse, then incise those areas and extract the remains of the wound or tie the body part to his hand with a cloth and extract it carefully, because that area will be swollen.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	Regarding the expulsion of the embryo from the mother's womb.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the wound is on the mother's womb, then you must push those upwards, and then turn the wound slightly, and then equalize that area, and then take one part of it and stretch those little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	But when it is expelled into the thighs, then you command them to strain, and cause that to be expelled with pressure, because it will be swollen if God wills it. 
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not removed by what we have recommended, then you return the small part little by little until you place that second natural figure back in, because that will now be easily expelled with a gentle emission.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is prohibited by all that we have recommended, then take moss of althea and dissolved gum, and pound all in the mortar with good pounding, and then apply this to the womb of the woman, at the base of her abdomen.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And then apply that cauterization with lukewarm water, until it reaches the hypochondriac regions. 
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when the separated parts of him are inflamed, then give him the fumigation of myrtle and pause that for him.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when you have smoked it for an hour, then make her sit on a chair, and then cause her to sneeze and open her mouth wide, and lift her up, and press the lower part of her abdomen with gentle pressure, because the matter will be expelled quickly.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Examine the wound on his knees and his hands.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the procedure will be carried out according to this method, then you introduce her hands little by little; and then the woman should lie on her back, with his feet hanging down, and she should be sitting on a low place, and cover her hands.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And then press on the patient's abdomen little by little, and then extract what remains under their feet from between the ears into a prepared container placed below. 
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the wind is not expelled, then take their feet and move them vigorously, and then press that which is above the hypochondriac regions little by little until the wind rises to the upper parts.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And then insert your fingers and gently guide the child out little by little, and command the woman to push as the child is being delivered.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Gently extract the child longitudinally while holding one of its hands.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Attempt to reduce the dislocation of his hand, but if you cannot do that, then raise the woman and let her move.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if she cannot move, then have her lie down on the bed, and vigorously shake her thighs, and then administer ointments that you prepare and mix with mucilages.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the birth has occurred, then have her sit on a chair, and then focus on reducing the dislocation of the hand, gently guide the child according to its natural position, and make the woman sneeze and command her to bear down until the delivery is complete. 
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Exuding from the neck over the head spread out his arms and the surface of him is on the side of his mother.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	It is necessary that the midwife hold the hand of the infant and then turn it little by little, so that this can be done easily.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is mixed and how much should be mixed, then apply over the anus what we have recommended of oil and ointments.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And then you command them to moan little by little, and when you have done that, then place that poultice on a plate and command them to lean over the right side, and then command them to be squeezed; and make that person sneeze with conditions.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The fetus prepared is placed on the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When they say to remove the horror of the mother according to this manner, consider, and then you incise with your fingernail between so that the humidity is evacuated.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the swelling is hanging over the face and neck of the patient, then you incise that which is causing the obstruction, so that it is not retained and the patient does not die.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	Then you push the swelling into the parts inside where you need to place it, and tell the woman to compress herself several times, and it will be expelled with a light discharge, if God so wishes.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The outcome of twin births or multiple fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that twins are often born, and sometimes three or four are born, though this is rare and seldom occurs; however, their causes lie in nature, not life. 
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And among those, even if they are multiplied, a second one, and they are separated by a ciphac, distinguish these within the ligament in the navel of each of them. And sometimes they are expelled as if it were done by a light natural secretion, and at other times they exit due to an unacceptable emission, just as we have recounted.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if there are difficult births of this kind that you need to assist in and reach a situation where we have mentioned unnatural positions, then treat those cases as we have recounted.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the practitioner is skilled and performs this with ease and subtlety, and with care, and is inventive according to every figure according to how it is prepared by the ingenuity bringing to health. 
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remembrance of what is formed in the womb from embryos and [what] are aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Here is the translation of the given sentence line by line:
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all of this should be known by the midwife who strongly resembles this condition, and therefore applies herself to it with what is necessary.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Capitol .lxxvi.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	From the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you treat a dead fetus as we have described in the section on medication and it has not been expelled, and you must use manual operation, then you should consider whether the woman is of sound health and not subject to any accidents that might cause her harm.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then the woman should be placed face down on a bed with her head lowered and her thighs raised.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the minister should hold her in two parts or tie her to the bed so that her body does not stretch during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	Then you should moisten the birth canal of the mother with oily liquids and with a poultice of fennel, fenugreek, and its seeds.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	Then anoint the woman's hand with those oils and poultices, and then insert her hand easily into the birth canal, and then search with the hand for the place where the fingers can grasp the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And here is the translation of the given line:
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	And if the discomfort is in the patient's feet, then it occurs in the heel or in the middle of the spine.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And it is necessary to hold the needle with the right hand, and place its curvature in that spot which is between the fingers of the left hand, and insert the hand easily so as to place the needle in one of those places we have mentioned, until reaching the swollen cause.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then place and keep in the appropriate position another person, or a third if necessary, so that the traction is equal, and not just according to its straightness alone.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And it should be massaged all over, so that the patient's pain is alleviated just as it is done in dental procedures for the extraction of a tooth.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And one must insert into the area between them something that will soften the extension; and if any part of it is stuck, then it is necessary for the midwife to anoint some of her fingers with oil and carefully insert those fingers and rotate them to free what is stuck.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore, if a part of the fetus is stuck, then the traction should be changed to the position that is more effective; and do this until the entire fetus is delivered.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if one hand is extended before the other and it is not possible to reduce that due to the contraction of the area, then a cloth should be wrapped around that hand; and then extract that part until it is entirely out, and incise either at the joint of the hand or at the wrist.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And thus you must do the same on the other hand and on both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	And if the head of the boil is large, or you encounter compression during its emergence, or if there is water tightly bound at the top, then you must insert between the fingers a pointed instrument and split the top to drain the water, or use an instrument called “alundat” for this purpose, the form of which will be provided with the forms of other instruments in the chapter that follows this one.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And similarly, if the boil has a large head by nature, then you must incise it with a scalpel, or take it out with an alundat as we have said; and then remove the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head has emerged but is compressed under the skin, then it should be cut open to allow the moisture within the feet to be discharged.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	But if it is not complicated and does not require immediate emergence, then you should incise the head as soon as it seems possible to you.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the lower part of the abdomen has an abscess or is affected by dropsy, then you must perforate it to allow the moisture within to be drained.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	And if the condition affects their feet, then its attraction is slight and the direction of it towards the mouth of the vein is slight.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	And if the abdomen and feet are constricted, then you must extract that which is wrapped around your hand with cloth, and cut into the abdomen and feet so that what is inside can flow out.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	Here is the translation line by line:
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the womb is constricted by an abscess that occurs near the uterus, then it should not be disturbed; first, you must administer a poultice made with moist and fatty substances.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And apply plasters; and follow up by bathing the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the abscess is on the patient's side, then it should be lanced, if possible; and what we have said should be administered to the fresh wound.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if this is not possible, then it should be cut into pieces and extracted.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And you must not leave any cause or residue inside the second layer.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And once you have completed all of your procedure, then administer what we have said about the treatment for abscesses that occur in the womb.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if bleeding occurs, then bathe in styptic waters and administer the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have seen a woman in whose womb a dead fetus was, and then on that same fire another pregnancy occurred, and then the fire killed the other fetus.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	And here is the translation of the provided line:
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called for his care, and treated him for a long time, but the plague did not subside.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I placed several strong adhesive plasters on him, and drew out a bone from him, and after some days, I drew out another bone; and I was very surprised because there were no bones in his abdomen.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then I thought that they were the bones of a dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then I treated the plague, and extracted many bones from him; the woman existed in his inner dispositions, and he lived in this manner for a long time, having lost a little of his arm. 
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I do not intend to be strange, but rather because in this is knowledge and aid for the doctor who administers treatment with skillful hands.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of an instrument with which the mother is cut open:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of a device with which the threads are tied, to which tying there are two hooks at the two ends of two handles.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	However, this hook must be finer than the forceps and can be made of iron or wood.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the width of each handle should be two fingers, and the edge of each should be about one finger wide, and the length of each is one and a half palms; in the middle of the two handles there are two joints made from the same material, which are already fixed, each being about half a palm long plus a little more, and the width of each is two fingers or slightly more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additional items should be inserted into the mother's mouth so that it is opened with them when you rotate the two prescribed instruments.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	And however at the end of his two additions thus as sometimes, and the length of those additions is each one palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the uterus with those means, then you make the woman lie down on the bed with her feet hanging off, and open what is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then open your hand with the instrument just as you would with scissors, evenly according to the amount you wish from the assessment of the mouth of the womb before the midwife does what she wants.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of dizziness which the ancients said:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Forma de amisidat am le qual es conterit le cap gran.
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is similar to a pair of forceps which have teeth at the end, just like tweezers, and sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, just like tweezers, which have teeth like those of a saw with which it is incised and contorted.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Forma de amesidat pauc:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Forma de unci havent una spina:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Forma de unci havent doas spinas:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of forceps with which teeth are closed in such a way that the head of the fetus is compressed:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Forma de dos espatums latz:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All those instruments are exercised, and when more types of them are multiplied and prepared properly by the artisans, the operation becomes lighter for its execution and better suited to people due to their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not use any of those instruments right away that you should prepare, for the necessity of them is not excusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	From the extraction of the stone (likely referring to the removal of a bladder or kidney stone).
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second stage of labor is delayed, then you must command the patient to hold their breath, and then cause them to sneeze with the aid of some irritant, and place your hand over their mouth and nose, and if by this means it helps expel [the baby], good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then you take an oven and make a hole in the lid and place herbs that burn on the mouth of the mother, such as calamus and rue and anise and chamomile and Arabic scammony and cinnamon bark and saffron.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water in the pot, and place that over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then place a cane tube in the mouth of the mare, and keep it there until the vapor reaches the cavity of the mare.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then make that person sneeze as we have said, and the second one will be expelled quickly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	Here is the translation of the provided text:
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Before it is necessary that the sides right and left be changed with ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And then adjust the amount of suction, for it will obey and withdraw from adherence.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the womb is constricted, we have already recommended treatment with sneezing and with medication using herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	But if it is not expelled by all the causes which we have recommended, then beware of not overexerting in repetitive attempts to withdraw it. However, it must be that what has been expelled from him into the mouth of the womb adheres to the woman's thigh, and then cleanse that area with unguents and compound medicines; for this will cause it to decay within a few days and become dissolved and eventually expelled.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	However, when it decays, the foul matter rises to the head and to the stomach, causing harm to the patient. Therefore, it is necessary to administer fumigations and appropriate treatments for this condition.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	However, some of the Ancients have prescribed fumigation with Southernwood and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Method for fumigating a woman with an instrument to address the retention of menses and secondary flow:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It is made from veal or lamb.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And let the narrow end be placed in the bowl and the wide end over the fire, and the fumigation should be placed over the embers of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And keep it there until that fumigation is consumed and repeat with another one.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	On the treatment of an unperforated infant's anus.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Some children are born with their anus unperforated, which is a narrow and obstructed condition.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then it is necessary for the midwife to pierce that obstruction with her finger; and if not, pierce it with a sharp spatula, being careful not to touch the bladder.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	Then place wool soaked in wine and oil over that area; then treat it with ointment until it heals.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	But if you fear that it is obstructed, then insert a catheter into the tract for several days, and remove it when the child needs to defecate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And it may happen that the anus is obstructed due to consolidation from a plague or an abscess; in that case, it is necessary to incise that consolidation and then treat it with the methods we have mentioned for treatment and using a lead applicator.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	For the treatment of fistulas that occur internally.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that appear in the lower part of the body are large and thick, those which appear near the anus externally or in the space of the lower part.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is a fistula or abscess.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that swelling is old and flows with white phlegmatic moisture or subtle putrefaction, and sometimes these fistulas are penetrating.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And these penetrating ones are known by what is excreted from them through discharge and windiness; and sometimes the patient experiences discharge, and it is often expelled with worms.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And sometimes these fistulas penetrate into the space between the bladder and into the penis tissue; and they also penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the anus.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And the way to distinguish a penetrating fistula from a non-penetrating one in the anus is by inserting your index finger into the anus and carefully introducing a thin probe of wax or metal into the fistula when there is no tortuosity.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if there is tortuosity in that fistula, then insert a thin probe of lead or horsehair until you feel the probe or the hair with your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel any of the aforementioned signs nor process any cause of evacuation or worms or flatulence as we have said, then know that it is non-penetrating, and now attend to the treatment.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the urethra of the penis, then its significance is that urine flows from it and prevents the area from being consolidated with medicine.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	But if it penetrates into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the area, then its sign is that it extends deeply within without any curvature in the bone, and causes pain in the circuit of the affected part; and that there is continuous pus discharge; and that medicine does not help in this case, nor can it be consolidated with ointment.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those penetrating fistulas, a complete cure is not always possible, and the treatment of these relies on the skill and ingenuity of the surgeons who are engaged with them.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	But in those that are not penetrating and are not chronic, healing with iron is hoped for, as I will recommend to you, and this I have already proven.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back and raises their legs towards themselves, with their thighs inclined toward their abdomen, and then insert a lead probe, or an iron one if it is in a winding fistula, to where you know the probe reaches.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if the patient feels pain around the neck, then you must insert your index finger into the neck.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel in your hand the attempt already by itself to penetrate openly, or what you feel between your hand and that piece of flesh or skin, then you know certainly that it is penetrating; and then do not work on that area, for there is no healing there, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But however some say that it is healthy in some men sometimes.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And for the treatment in which improvement is hoped, you make a fine cautery according to the width of the fistula, as was previously mentioned, and insert that ignited cautery into the fistula until it reaches around the neck; then repeat this two or three times until you know that all those fistulized flesh parts resembling feather shafts are properly adhered.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	Then treat it with dressings wrapped in bandages until all the adhered flesh comes out, and then treat it with medicines that generate and consolidate the flesh. If it is healed, well and good; but if not, it will never be cured by any other treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if you insert the probe inside, and it does not penetrate your finger which is in the anus, and between that finger and the probe there appears a thin layer of flesh or membrane, and you twist the fistula so that it lies on the surface of the cord, then dry the cord from the beginning of the fistula. You will see it drying with the probe, and place the probe inside until the drying reaches the point where the tip of the probe is, and through this process, it is freed and cut.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then clean those fistulated flesh that resembles a bird feather quill and do not damage any of them for any reason.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	Here is the translation line by line:
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then treat it with cloths wrapped in fat or in finely ground herbs that the place emits sweat, and then treat the wound with ointments that generate and consolidate tough flesh.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And with medicines that have astringent and drying properties; when it is restored, it is healed and you do not fear recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	And if the fistula has already penetrated into the rectal area and extends from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and investigate with it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And if during the examination there is a veil of tissue or flesh between you and it, and it resists penetration, then no operation should be performed on it except through methods of trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The treatment should be administered in one of three ways: either cauterize it as we have said; or dry out the area so that you can achieve entry into its cavity and enable the insertion of instruments for further cure; do not proceed with cutting so that you do not penetrate the vein containing blood, and ensure that this is done without the patient feeling it against their will; then treat it as we have stated, ensuring that it heals properly; or extend the veil and cleanse the pus by drying out the area near the anus as mentioned, using a probe or another instrument with a sharp end, then cleanse those fistulated areas which you can access through perforation; then strive to restore all of the affected area through cutting, but if the pus discharge openings above are not consolidated, leave the fistula open at the part of the anus so that less pus will flow out for the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the fistula is treated in this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it goes around the surface of the body with the chain near the edge of the buttocks, then take a probe with a perforated tip, which is like a needle used for preparing the cores in this way:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	And introduce into that area wrapped in five leaves or around it; and then introduce试探性地用一片叶包裹进去，直到达到其腔体。
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	But if you penetrate the margin of the anus from inside, then you extract the thread from that place in such a way that you insert your finger into the anus; and pull out the end of the thread and tie both ends together, tighten each one, and leave it for a day or two, and when you cut the thread in the flesh, make sure to squeeze tightly within so that the flesh between the two ends of the thread is compressed and falls.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	Then treat the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	But if the openings of the fistula are not penetrated, then you must penetrate them in whatever way you deem appropriate, but make sure there is movement in the pus, for it is not proper to do so that you cut into the healthy tissue; and then treat it until it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The form of the spiked spatula with which the fistula is split: the curvature of which is sharply pointed and the other part is blunt, so that you do not cut what is not necessary, as is often done.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	On sewing hemorrhoids in which blood flows during the incision.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And of those [sores] that are small and large, and from which blood flows continuously and it is one [type], and they have spots, and they are outside the anus, and in the extremities.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	And yet those that are around the anus follow months of little moisture, during which yellow water or a bit of blood flows continuously, and according to the color of the body. 
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the treatment for that which is inside the anus is that you command the patient to sit and to strain such that the anus dilates and the hemorrhoids become visible to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you take care and suspend them with hooks or hold them with your nails, and then cut those veins at their roots.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	But if the joints are not held in place by their moisture and softness, then take them with rough cloth or wool batting or a fleece of wool, and extract them with your fingers as directed, and then cut into them and sprinkle over them certain powders appropriate to the cutting, so that they may serve instead of cauterization; or cauterize them according to what is prescribed in the chapter on cauterizing.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then treat them with the other treatment until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the stool does not come out easily, then use a clyster on the patient with a small opening, and wash it with the water that is in the colon, which should facilitate a mild evacuation when the patient is squeezed. 
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	If the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then their cause is superficial, and you should take them with your fingernail, or take them with a hook, cut them, and then treat them as we have said until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And for the incision that you make, you should administer sutures in the following manner: take thread wrapped and insert it into a needle and then pull out the hemorrhoids to the areas above, and let it penetrate with the needle at the base of the other side, and wrap both ends of the thread across from where the needle is, and do this laterally; grip the hemorrhoid tightly with force, and then tie the thread and remove the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this to all of them, but leave one of them open and do not sew it up, so that the excess blood can flow out from that one.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	Then place over the anus a cloth infused with anointed oil or ointment; place that over it and instruct the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then place that inside the cavity; and when it is settled, care for those areas with ointments or other treatments until they are healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	On the treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	White spots occur due to drying of the skin or natural constriction.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And when they are old and no longer respond to that medicine, then you must scrape those areas with the tip of a spatula or with your nail until they become moist and free from the pus on top, which prevents them from healing; then treat those areas until they heal.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then you remove those areas with more forceful scraping than the first until blood flows and they are raw; then treat those areas until they heal.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	On the treatment of hemorrhoids, this is crucial.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that alamermar, which is crucial, appears as round spots similar to the color of a clove, and it occurs all over the body, particularly in the areas of the feet and hands, and often causes severe pain.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then it is necessary that which is within the area of the nail be cut, and it should be held with scissors or tweezers, and removed from its root; and then care for it.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you want, cauterize the wound that is described in the previous chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	And a wart is a small, rough, tubular, round elevation on the surface of the body, and they often appear on the hands of children. 
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And the treatment of it is that you extend and incise that area, or that you twist that area with a thread or with hair inside which contracts.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you want, cauterize that, as we have said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And already the reversed and non-reversed ones have been removed with the instrument that I will describe.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	And the formica is a small, hairy or fistular bump on the surface of the body that moves slightly under the skin, and when cold reaches it, it causes pain similar to an ant bite, and it appears around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And the treatment for it is that you take a tube made from an owl's feather or a vulture's feather, and let it be strong, and place that over the formica so that it contains it within the circle of the tube; then rotate your hand with the tube until you cut out what is in the circuit of the formica, and press that into the skin, and thus root out the formica from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, do this with a tube of reed or iron according to this method:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Let the part above the tube be tapered, closed (that is, not perforated), and covered so that when placed on a finger, its appearance is smooth and it can be rotated easily.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you want to cauterize the anthrax as was mentioned in the cautery of Atheyl in the chapter on cauterization.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	Of the form of the instruments that are used to give christs (administer communion).
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Here is the translation of the provided text:
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of large and small blisters:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the tube above, which is tied to the bag, should be wide according to this manner; and it should be at such a distance where the bag is tied just so. 
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the end of the pus below, which is inserted into the anus, is closed (that is, not open) with a lion; retreating to subtlety; and on one side there are two tracks, and on the other side one track, and the width of the track is according to the thickness of the rays and slightly thicker.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And let there be a bag in which are placed the medicines of animal bladder or sheepskin, and its opening is one palm wide.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be pierced by thick threads in such a way that it is twisted; and the space between the threads is as thick as a finger.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then pour into those channels strong honey from raw honey which is made of ten honeys or around them; and adjust with that the bag; and when the bag is placed on him, it should be tight at the top of the rectum between two distinguishable points with strong constriction; and then catheterize each channel: However, the quality of catheterizing in this way is that you fill the bag with the medicine which should be warmed according to the quantity of tolerance of the patient; and beware that it is not too hot nor too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And then the patient should be placed on their back, and raise their thighs up and place them on a pillow or a bolster on which they can rest; and then anoint the tip of the catheter with oil or egg white or mucilage of fenugreek or similar substances; and then insert that into the rectum easily; and then the minister should take the bag and squeeze it with both hands and often with force until everything in the catheter is evacuated into the intestine; and then remove the catheter and the patient raises their thighs to the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine causes an emission, let it be as much as possible; and if one sleeps with that for an entire night, it is more beneficial for healing.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	If you apply this treatment in cases of diarrhea and the patient's vomiting bothers them, then repeatedly use the cautery until it is healed. 
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if there are hemorrhoids or abscesses in the anus, then it is necessary to use a gentle and strong cathartic, of those cathartics with which children are purged.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Of the treatment of plagues.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	I have already said in the division of the treatment of plagues what was appropriate for the book, and I say thus the treatment of those with hands and medicines according to the fulfillment.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Thus, I say that plagues are diversified according to how the plagues are caused and according to the place where the plagues fall.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes for which plagues are often caused are thus: throwing of stones, or cutting with a sword or knife, or striking with a lance, or with clubs, or with arrows, or similar to many such causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	However, the plagues that are in the parts of the body are thus: a plague that falls on the head, or the neck, or the foot, or the abdomen, or the thigh, and similar to those of the other limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I am recommending the treatment of some plagues so as to provide that reasoning and rule for the other plagues.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will begin with simple headaches, for the memory of compound ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Thus, when you encounter a simple headache in the head and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it is due to an accumulation of stones or something similar, and already the chain has tightened so much that it causes severe pain and you fear the development of an abscess, then you should be cautious and perform venesection on the cephalic vein immediately, do not delay this; extract as much blood according to the strength of the patient unless there is any prohibiting cause for venesection, especially if the blood that comes out from the headache is small.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And the venesection should be performed on the opposite side of the affected area; and take care to protect the patient from cold and from heavy foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if there is any prohibiting cause due to caution, then reduce the food intake and avoid meat and wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And place over the affected area, if an abscess has formed, some wool in olive oil or in wine which has been stypticated (made astringent).
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	And if it is certain of an abscess, then place it on the wound, if it is recent with its own blood and the air has not changed that powder which I will mention shortly.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed that condition, then place poultices on it until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	And if the wound is large or caused by a sharp and similar object, and the edges of it cannot be brought together with pillows, then bring those edges together with sutures as I will describe regarding the suturing of them.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	But if the wound has already exposed the bone and sinew, and it is not a retention but merely a small suspension, then incise that area and subsequently treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh by applying them in a bound position. Command the patient to be fed food rich in nourishment: meat and form compositions similar to them until it heals.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find putrefaction in the wound that does not adhere to the bone, then you should cut out all of that rotten part and remove it, and subsequently treat it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	But if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which bleeding can occur and it is not stopped by medicines, then you should probe the artery. If you find that it has not been cut, then you should cut it with a spatula, or tie it off. And if necessity forces you such that what we have said does not work, then cauterize until the bleeding stops.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these plagues are simple and small, then their cause is light; therefore, you powder over those this powder, which solidifies before the air changes them.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the method of the powder is as follows: take oil from vipers in equal parts one, dragon's blood in two parts, and unextinguished charcoal in three parts; let it all be well ground and sifted, and fill the wound with it, and apply strong pressure over that area until it adheres, and coagulate it with blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	Then bind that area with bandages and leave it like that, and do not untie it until it is no longer swollen, because the medicine will not be effective until it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes this is done with only cautery, when you do not have vipers and dragon's blood available.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this method of operation is performed on large wounds when it is necessary to apply it over them tightly, and on fresh wounds with their blood, which have not been altered by the air.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, especially during summer, then this powder is not intended for their treatment. Instead, treat them as we have said, by placing certain ointments or powders made from barley flour mixed with water and honey over them until they become putrefied; then treat them with other remedies until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	And if you encounter a fracture in the bone with the wound, and it is small, then you extract that with gestures.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I will describe the treatment for skull fractures in what is venomous or poisonous.
De las plaguas del col.	From the afflictions of the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	But if the affliction occurs in the neck, then there is no difference in treatment, and it is the same as the affliction of the head when it is simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	But if the nerves or arteries of the neck are cut, then if it is a nerve, the treatment should not be violent but rather avoided with something that has strong astringent properties, such as zinc and vitriol, which bind and constrict those nerves.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not apply any source of cold to the affliction, for the substance of the nerves is cold and their continuation is connected to the brain, which is the most sensitive part of all the members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it is treated with mild medicines, such as washing with warm water, sometimes mixed with oiled or un-oiled rose, and thuya when washed with warm water, and other mineral stones according to this method, and anointed with moist ointments.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the affliction is large, then administer stitching, or constrict the edges of it, and then treat it with poultices until it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	And if the wound has depth or you encounter pus in the lowest part with putrefaction, then pierce it at the most depressed spot.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	But if in the wound an artery is already cut and bleeding occurs, then separate or dry it out, ligate it, or cauterize it if the situation necessitates such action.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the vertebrae of the neck have already been cut through entirely and the veins of the neck are saved, then you should sew the edges of the wound over the bone of the neck without touching it; first equalize it and return it to its natural shape, then strengthen it with proper binding, and leave it for several days; then treat it with ointments that have astringent and stimulating properties until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	But if the wound has caused a fracture in the bone, then percuss it, and if there are fragments of bone within, extract all that you can; leave what cannot be removed until the wound becomes putrid, and let them separate so that the swelling subsides.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the wound is recent, then sprinkle over it the powder that has been recommended to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	And if the wound has formed an ulcer, then treat it with the method which will be mentioned later in its respective section.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Regarding wounds to the neck or similar ones that occur between the shoulders, whether caused by a sword, knife, lance, or similar weapons.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a puncture from a lance or sword and you measure the depth of the wound, then consider whether there is air coming out of the wound when the patient breathes; if so, know that the wound is mortal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is no deep penetration and the wound is fresh with its own blood, then you should apply powder to it within the first hour; do not keep it sealed so that the blood is not retained in the depth of the wound and returns to the heart, harming the patient. Instead, apply an attractive ointment and wash it twice a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the ointment is not available, then you should apply a dry cloth to the wound's opening to absorb the moisture that comes out; and have the patient lie in such a way that the pus or fluid in the wound can drain properly.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	More if three days or more have passed since the plague has taken hold and you do not see spasms, tremors of a bad heart, nor constriction of the breath in the patient, and other good signs appear, then know that the plague is manageable; and then treat it with poultices and with other cures until it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	But if the healing of it is unnecessary and has been open for a long time, then know that a fistula has formed; therefore, treat it according to its chapter [likely referring to a specific section in medical texts dealing with such conditions].
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the wound is caused by a cut from a sword or knife and is simple on the surface of the foot or back, then treat it with stitching if it is large, or with powder if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	But if it has already caused a fracture in the bone and pieces of it are embedded, then you should probe the wound and cut to extract those pieces, if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	But if they are not separated, then leave them inside until the wound becomes pus-filled, as the extraction of them will be easier.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other accidental plagues in other parts of the body, the remedy in curing is the remedy we have mentioned.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the ailments of the abdomen.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The discomfort that occurs in the abdomen can be either severe, mild, or moderate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	In severe cases, you will see the intestine or nerve of the intestine protruding, which causes a more forceful and finer intervention in their insertion and suturing.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And a small rupture is made difficult by another method, and it is known that their reduction is more difficult if you do not attend to their insertion back into their proper place promptly, because they swell and become thickened, making the intervention difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And thus, the best disruption is moderate, for in that case, the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, just as it is difficult in the two previously mentioned types.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And know that the suturing of the abdomen is done in four ways, but two of these methods are common and are also used for suturing other ailments of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And the other two specific methods of suturing are similar to those used for other ailments, but they are more specifically applied in the suturing of the abdomen.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I recommend to you each with explanation and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Thus it is said that when the hernia is small and some part of the intestine protrudes because of this, and it becomes difficult to reduce it back, then it happens in one of two ways: either due to the smallness of the rupture as we have said, or when the intestine swells due to the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And thus when it is so, then you must warm it in such a way that you submerge a sponge or cloth soaked in warm water alone, or boiled in vinegar, and cyperus, and nutmeg, and apply that to the intestine until the swelling is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And sometimes it is done in the way that has astringency, and it is better than water alone for reducing the swelling.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And thus when you see the swelling resolved, then moisten the intestine with water in which mullein and mallows have been boiled, for this alleviates the irritation of it with little trouble.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	And if it is necessary to use the instrument for this treatment, then cut the rupture slightly with an instrument with which you typically excise hemorrhoids.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first cure is better when it is appropriate that there be no drying out, and not to engage in drying nearby necessity and deficiency.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	From the instrument, make it in this form:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of the sharp wound, and the other part not-sharp, and the extremity subtle, and not be like the subtlety of a spatum, before it should be slightly blunt.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And so when the wound is enlarged and the intestine is brought out, it is necessary that its reduction be according to its natural form, in its proper place, if possible, for that is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	And when the disruption is wide and in the lower part of the belly, then you must have the patient lie on their back, and raise their thighs higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you raise the head and feet higher than the other parts.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then always direct your attention and consideration so that the part where the wound is, be higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus you must administer this in severe wounds and in moderate wounds as well.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in small wounds, use what you have prepared, then have the assistant stand between your compassionate hands, who holds the entire disruption with their hand and aligns the edges, then expose from one side to another where the suture can be placed appropriately.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of suturing: first take the needle, or a series of needles according to the quantity of the width of the wound; and then leave from the extremity of the disruption of the ring finger, and hold the needle firmly so that you do not put thread at both ends of the chain; with both ends of the clamp that is under the chain of the parts inside, until you make it penetrate through that part; and you have already added both ends of the chain and both ends of the clamp, thus making four layers. 
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And then strengthen with double thread around the needle's circumference, and sometimes from both sides at once, and then bring together the two lips and the wound by a decent approximation; and then leave the thickness of a finger and put another needle there, and then tie that one with thread just as you did with the first needle; and do not stop doing this if it is necessary with needles until you have completed the entire compression of the wound.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And let the needles be of medium thickness between thick and fine, for fine needles barely penetrate the flesh; and thick ones are difficult to insert into the wound, and therefore they should be of medium fineness and thickness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And it is not necessary to insert the needle at both ends of the wound immediately, so that the flesh is not barely cut and the wound can close before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And let the sutures not be too long so that the wound is not prevented from consolidating.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then sharpen the ends of the needles so that they do not disturb the patient during their sleep; and place on the sutures small pieces of cloth from all sides, which hold the ends of the needles; and leave them until you know that the wound is already consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And these species of suture with needles in such a manner is more convenient for small wounds, where only one needle or two or around that number suffice for the suture.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And then when you have penetrated these four extremities with the needle, withdraw the needle from that same part where you started, so that the thread pulls all of the pus from the underlying part to the wound, so that the suture is like a cloth suture with which cloths are sewn together.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And pause between each suture the width of the smallest finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this suture is known to men. 
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And with such a suture, I sewed the wound which had been inflicted on a man in his abdomen who had been struck by a dagger; and it was the disruption of the wound more than one palm wide, and it was thus from the intestines around two palms from the middle area and was the disruption at the center of the member; and then I returned that after the intestine had been out of the wound for twenty-four hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the plague was consolidated in the space of fifteen days or so, and if one is cured, they are healed; then this lasts for many years, and their disposition changes.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And the other doctors had judged that he would not be healed; and by a miracle, for I did not cure him with ointment, for I was in a place where no ointment or any medicine was found, but placed my hand on the wound twice a day and washed it diligently with honey water until it was healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	And I will describe two types of suture specific according to the narration of Paraula.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And you should begin with chain stitching, and insert the needle from the outer part to the inner part.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And so, as the needle penetrates into the chain and in that manner continues straight and along the length of the entire body, leave the end of the thread with which you have inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate at the other end from the inner part to the outer part on the other end of the wound.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And once you have made that penetration, then penetrate again at the same end of the wound from the outer part to the inner part; and leave the thread end on this side, and make the needle penetrate at the other end from the inner part to the outer part.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make your penetration with that which allows you to penetrate into the rectum at the end of the instrument which is in the part inside so that all of it penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then begin from this side and sew it with the end that is on the opposite side, and remove the needle from the thread which has penetrated, and then return it to the same thread and sew the end of the opposite side with this external part; and remove it from the thread which belongs to the patient.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this once and again, and do this once then another time before you sew up everything that is outside according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the summary of this method of suturing is that you sew with a skin suture with which I sew skins, meaning that you sew the wound once from the end of the chain, and leave it for another time until it is completed. 
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	You should place the needle at the extremity of the vein near you from the outer part, and make that penetrate into the inner part in that same spot, and leave two extremities of the thread; then turn the needle and make it penetrate from outside to inside through both ends of the thread.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And then rotate those flaps, and make each part from inside penetrate to the outer part at both ends of the wound except where they are on the opposite side. 
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this method of sewing is better than common thread stitching, and it is a type of stitching that leads to quicker healing.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the section about Gout
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And more: they also say that the abdominal suture is corrected with two needles, so that you insert a thread into each of them, and begin by inserting the needle from your side, and make it penetrate through to the other side according to the suturing method used for sewing hearts evenly. 
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And know that when disruption is in the middle part of the abdomen, then缝合它比腹部其他部位的缝合更困难。
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	But the treatment of plague medicine is judgment of other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The sentence provided is a mix of languages with elements resembling medieval Latin and Romance languages. Here's an attempt at translating it into English based on context clues:
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the wound, then apply on that area ointments which you have prepared so that they do not harden into a stone and release the bile, and heal and observe; then treat it in such a way as is the treatment of other wounds until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	And if you do not have the medicines at hand, then apply something to that area immediately, as it begins to discharge pus and becomes worse, and change that twice a day, just as you have been taught, until it is healed, for you should not require other medication in many conditions when the wounds are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	But if you fear that the wound may spread to the major limbs, then it is necessary to soak lion's wool in high-quality tempered oil or in anointed oil, and apply that around the area between the joints and leave them there.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if there is pain or putrefaction in the intestines, as this often occurs multiple times, then treat it with black styptic vinegar, especially if the corruption has spread to the intestine and has penetrated into its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And you should know that the condition of the large intestine is more easily healed than that which affects the finer intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is difficult to heal when the intestine called “gegunu” does not receive healing from a plague that affects it entirely; and this is due to the great number of veins within it, the size of those veins, the fineness of its structure, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	But if what you process from the plague is the membrane, and you obtain it fresh, reduce it according to your prescription with which you treat the intestines equally.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	But if it has spread to the space and is already turned green or black, then when you bind that area with a string over the part that is discolored, to cause bleeding, because in the membrane there are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	Then cut what is another layer of the membrane, and hang the two ends of the string from the part where the plague has exited, so that you may relieve the tension of it by lifting the membrane and allowing the discharge of the flux from the plague.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembrance of the plagues when they occurred in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When a rupture occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it can be repaired in some men. Therefore, I saw one who was wounded in his abdomen with a lance strike, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old and had turned into a fistula, and thus there was discharge and gas.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Therefore, I considered the treatment of him already such that he was not confused in his healing, rather ceased to complicate that which is being healed and the area has been consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And I must see the area already stabilized, to guard against the patient encountering an unfortunate incident in their abdomen; and because of this unfortunate accident, they do not get any and continue with their proper dispositions eating and drinking; then bathe and exercise as directed.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced ones have said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be tied according to this method: you take ants with large heads; then adjust the two lips of the wound and place an ant from those that have their mouth open over the two lips of the wound; thus when it grabs onto them and tightens its mouth, cut off the head of the ant, because it adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	Then place another ant next to the first one, and do not stop doing this with ants placed one next to the other according to the quantity of the entire wound.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	Then reduce that and close the wound; let those heads remain attached inside the intestine until it is healed; do not cause any harm to the patient.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestine be tied with fine thread made from the same animal's intestines, as it is more suitable for use. You take the end of these intestinal threads, ensuring they are stripped of flesh, then tie the end of the thread to the intestine, wrapping it around, and then insert that thread through needles and sew the intestine together, and reduce that in the disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this method of缝合使用蚂蚁不过是基于信任和希望的第二种方式。
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	And if the wound is large and extensive, especially if it is in one of the finer intestines, then in such a case there is nothing to do but suturing, and not a complete cure.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Of the treatment of boils and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that any swelling or abscess when it becomes corrupted and old, and turns into an ulcer, and does not heal but continues to discharge pus continuously without being severed, then, in whichever part of the body it may be, it is universally called a fistula and we call that kind of ulcer azukem.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And a fistula, in truth, is a furry, hard, white nodule that is not painful and has a cavity similar to the bone of a bird; therefore, we call that kind of ulcer rizatz, which means bone.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And in some people, there is moisture that discharges pus; and strongly at times, this moisture is expelled within a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And at times this moisture is scanty, and it is thick, and it is fine.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already said before in the division when I talked about the swellings that any ulcer which does not heal or is not on bare flesh is so for one of these reasons: one of which is either due to a lack of blood in the body; or because of the bad quality of the blood; or because there is hard flesh between it and the edges preventing the growth of new flesh; or because it is a small amount; or because that ulcer itself has been corrupted and the material within it is of poor quality; or because the medicine used for its treatment is inappropriate; or when corruption affects the region, and it becomes pestilential; or due to the nature of the region, as in Saragossa, where diseases are difficult to digest and the natural healing of abscesses is delayed; or because there is bone within it, or many bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	And all those causes have been shown, and the signs of them and their cure through medicines in this section.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And it is necessary that I make you know the cure of a fistula which is done by means of an operation with my hand.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And know that fistula can occur in all parts of the body; for among these are fistulas that reach the large veins and arteries, or the nerves, or the spine, or the intestine, or the bladder, or one of the ribs, or one of the vertebrae of the back, or one of the compound joints such as those of the hand and foot; and these are the ones that affect the proximity of the main limb and its likeness.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And therefore, among these fistulas that follow this manner, they are among the diseases difficult to heal, and do not receive cure; the occupation with such is labor and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if among the fistulas there is any whose depth does not reach these places that have been mentioned, and you hope and rely on its cure, and wish to understand it, then take a thread of wool or iron, and if the fistula runs straight, probe it with this.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	But if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a thin lead wire, for lead, due to the lightness of its body, is flexible and follows the twists.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula is filled with terrible pus, it is not possible for you to make sense of it by touch.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then irrigate the orifices through their openings, for the moisture with which you irrigate that goes to cleanse the other orifices and flows out from them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	Then inquire carefully, according to the method by which you can recognize if there are bones or nerves here, and whether it is the cavity of a long or short fistula, or if it is a fistula that has multiple openings and you must examine all of this with your full strength, through your examination, with which you investigate the patient, and discover the cause of the pain by compressing the area with your hand, and similar signs and accidental causes of the abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have stood over all those causes with true assessment, then proceed to the treatment based on confidence: that is, you should now consider whether it is an apparent fistula near or in a salty place, long from a joint, or from a nerve, or from an artery, or from a vein, or from one of the places which you know and say.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Now you dry the fistula as previously mentioned regarding its opening, and remove what is in that filtration and from corrupted flesh, and what has grown in the openings of the flesh, or of tissue and similar things, and treat that interior so that it may be healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	And if the fistula is of great depth and runs straight, then you must incise it as deeply as possible according to your ability; then clean all its corrupted flesh from around it; and apply bandages wrapped with sharp medicines, and insert them into the cavity of the fistula that you have probed with an iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do this several times until the sharp medicine corrodes all that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula from the corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore it with ointments that will generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	And if it is not healed by this method, then you must cauterize it as we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the cause of the fistula is bone and you must be certain of this, then you should investigate it and dry it out as we have recommended, provided you do not damage any veins or nerves or major limbs as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	And if the bone is exposed and there is some corruption and blackening in it, then you must scrape it until all the corruption is removed; then treat it with something that will promote flesh growth until it is healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if the arm is not healed and thrown out as it should be, then you know that you have not reached the complete eradication of the corruption; and then you re-examine it carefully and thoroughly investigate the reason for it and cleanse it with your final strong treatment, and then restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And if it is healed, that is good; and if not, then you know that the corruption is in the distant depths of the body, which has not been reached, and then there is nothing for you to do but to leave that alone.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is possible for you to extract it, then you should remove it with delicate forceps that are suitable for this purpose.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there are multiple bones [affected], then carefully extract all of them, and do not leave any behind for any reason with your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if any cause of moisture hinders you, and there is neither fear nor error in its incision, then cut those ligaments or flesh if they are present, and free the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	And if you are not prepared to set the bones of the hour (time), then place over the wound something that may rot the wound itself, and leave it within so that it is around those bones among flesh and ligaments, and protect the wound so it does not consolidate too quickly, and constrict the section which you have incised in your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	When translating the given text line by line into English, we get:
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	Here is the translation of the provided medieval medical text line by line into English:
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	And if what is corrupted of him is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that area by cutting inside where the corruption has spread, and then treat it so that it becomes consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend to you what happens to a man in his thigh so that you may use this as an example and assistance for your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then, extend the time with that due to the mistake of doctors until the abscess is opened, and pus will come out from it, and its cure will be gradually stopped until the chest becomes fistulized, and many small holes are made in it through which all the putrefaction and moisture of the body flow out.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then many doctors attended for about two years, and none of them knew much about the art until I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And you see the chest of him and the materials that were flowing from those orifices by great force; and already the body of that man was entirely discolored and the color of it was yellowish.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I inserted the probe into one of those orifices and brought the probe to the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then I examined closely all the orifices and found those that lead to them from all parts of the chest.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I treated and incised on one of those orifices where I uncovered a part of the bone, and found it corrupted; it was already rotten, corrupted, and blackened; and a part of the thigh had also been corrupted where it had penetrated into the ankle.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I sew up what was exposed and prepared of the exposed bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I check that the corruption was not in the bone but only on the surface, which I have already cut out and sewn up.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	Then apply the restoration of the wound with consolidating medicine for a long time, and it is not consolidated. 
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then I re-examine and uncover over the bone again after the first uncovering, and find continuous corruption with the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And recognize that which appears to me as corruption from it, and then I was pierced in performing the cure and restoration of it, and it is not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I expose the other side and do not cease to cut the bone little by little particularly and perforate its restoration, and it is not restored until I cut around about a palm of it, and that which is extracted with its marrow, and then restore it with medicines, and it is lightly consolidated and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And iteration in the operation and section of it is not necessary except due to the disposition of its frailty and the lack of tolerance and fear of death, for accidium (depression) affects at all times because of the excess evacuation causing fainting spells.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And thus it is fully healed, and where there was bone, now there is hard flesh; and its condition is well disposed in its body and its strength returns; it is converted in its conditions and does not suffer contradiction in movement nor harm in any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	However, if there is a protruding bone in an already injured part of the body, then you must cut it according to this method: take a ligament and tie it tightly at the end of the protruding bone, and command someone to pull on it; use a thicker woolen ligament than the first one; then bind it over the flesh below the bone, and stretch the extremity so that you pull the flesh towards the sides, and thus you expose the flesh over the area where you wish to cut, so that the saw does not touch the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And place a stick or board under the bone properly, for when you do this, it is not forbidden to saw where the corrupted flesh does not dry.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And it is necessary that the incision be made gradually on the corrupted area, because if the corruption is in the concavity of the bone and does not appear on its surface to the touch, it may require another incision.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, before one part connects with the other, and the corruption is in the middle or in some part of it, then you uncover all the flesh completely from all sides; then place a splint under it, and then bind that first part where the corruption is so that the suture of the other part continues.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And let the binding be according to the location of the corruption, a little bit, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and bind the bone where it continues to the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation between two joints, then it is not reasonable but rather a complication.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; however, you must investigate how the corruption appears to you, and you should open that area, and clean it according to whatever method is possible for you, and with every complication be corrected by you, as long as it does not interfere with veins or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And you should know what are the incisors and the saws used to cut these bones, which are selected according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of those, and the thickness of those, and the fineness and the largeness and the smallness of those, and the hardness and their rarity; for that reason you must prepare every kind of instrument suitable for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And you should know that this operation requires you to be knowledgeable about the type of instrument you will need; when you have great study, long experience, and knowledge of the methods of this art, and witness to the ways of illnesses, so that now you can apply what is appropriate from the instruments to every illness.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And I advise you, at the end of this chapter, to list the number of instruments that you will use simply with which you will proceed in your practice, which you will perform on others.
Forma de serra:	Form of the saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Forma de autra serra gran:
Forma de ray:	Forma de ray:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	Make the head of this rod in the shape of a star-headed hammer, and the points on it should be arranged like the barbs of an arrow.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it is not suitable that when the ends of the joints are corrupted or the mouth (likely referring to a bodily opening such as the mouth or an orifice) is widely open, they should be rubbed.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Forma de razori major dels others:
Forma de razori menor:	Forma de razori menor:
Forma de razori lat:	It seems that the provided sentence "Forma de razori lat:" is incomplete or possibly a heading for a section. Based on the previous translations and the context of medieval medical treatises, this could be referring to the form or shape of a surgical knife or razor.
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.
Forma de lu:	The given phrase "Forma de lu:" seems incomplete or like it might be leading into a description. Based on the context provided by previous sentences, which discuss medical procedures in somewhat archaic language, this line could be interpreted as:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Form of razor or subtle method:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Form of instruments with which bones are cut:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Form of a smaller incision:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Form of another incisor; this resembling a saw, and the end of it is like a scissors, and it is exhibited in multiple places along the ratio of the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio dequel que es perforat dels osses:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And the end of it is triangular and with a sharp tip. 
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly, all the causes we have mentioned for razors, scissors, and saws must be considered.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of the incision of extremities and the suturing of bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	Extremities may decay either due to intrinsic causes or extrinsic causes. If you have treated that corruption with medicinal cure and the cure does not succeed, or if the corruption spreads to the member without any apparent cause, then it is necessary for you to incise that member where the corruption adheres so that the patient may be saved from death or severe malice which is a greater deficiency of the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of the one to whom this happens is that the member turns black before it dries up, as if fire had already consumed it, or the blackness will spread so that the putrefaction within that member affects him and spreads throughout the entire body; therefore, be quick to incise that area.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	Similarly, if the corruption is caused by some venomous creatures such as a marine scorpion, viper, or toad, and the like.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or the affliction is in the extremity of the finger, then you should incise the finger and do not give space for the corruption to spread into the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly if you access the hand, then you incise that of the wrist area, and do not give space for corruption to set in within the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if you need to do that, then cut the arm between the elbow and the joint. 
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if the corruption spreads further and encircles the knee, then at that point the patient's death occurs; and administering other causes for this in treatment is a measure of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly treat the foot when corruption invades the area of the foot, then you incise it between one of the toes.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it affects the sole of the foot, then you incise the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	And if it rises into the knee, then you incise the thigh between the joint of the knee.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already spread above the knee, then there is no remedy but submission, and leave the patient to die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the method of incising or amputating the limb is that you tighten a ligature at the part below where you want to incise, and place another ligature above the area; and have an assistant stretch one ligature on the lower parts, and another assistant extend another ligature above it; and you separate the flesh between the two ligatures with a spatula so that all the flesh is exposed; then proceed to incise or amputate.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And it is necessary to place cloth on all sides so that the area does not touch anything, and to prevent the patient from getting an adjusted injury or a boil. 
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	And if you encounter a flow of blood while working, then cauterize the area properly, or apply some powders that stop the bleeding; and then return to your treatment until it is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then bind the afflicted limb with a suitable bandage, and care for it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I recommend to you what happened to a man in his foot, this accidental event which I and you recommend, which is that an accident caused blackening in his foot due to a burn that resembled fire combustion.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corrupting accident first occurred in his toe and then spread to the entire foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepared himself to perform various pus-draining procedures to treat the limb with the intensity of the pain and burning he experienced, and he cut into that foot up to the joint, and it was healed.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	A long time ago, that same corrupting accident occurred in the index finger of his hand.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then it happens to me, and thus I perforate to expel that excess with what is placed on the hand of medicines, near the purification of his body; and if the excess is not expelled and begins to go inward instead of coming out through the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And the patient urges me to cut off his hand, and I do not wish to do so hoping that the excess might be expelled otherwise, and more because I fear the cutting of the dead man's hand, for the strength of the patient is waning.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And since he departed from me, he returned to his land and it came to me that this man prepared and cut open his hand entirely, and was healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have added this narration only to assist with understanding this disease, and for its meaning to be understood and according to which it should be treated.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	About the treatment of nasal issues and the quality of enemas with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess occurs in fleshy limbs and the space of the abscess is prolonged to the point where pus collects, and then it bursts and perforates, expelling the pus from it, leaving the area empty like a vessel, and the skin over it hangs loosely like fine cloth, without reaching severe corruption, and does not affect the bone or nerves or ligaments, it is called a sinus, and it is not named as a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	However, if the space is prolonged to the point where corruption affects some limb, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the treatment of it is to incise that skin entirely as it has turned, especially when it is thin and hangs like cloth, and ensure that it does not adhere to the area due to its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	Here is the translation of the given line:
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And you should consider the vein, and if it is large, and the arm that you use has a foul odor, then you should enema this area with an Egyptian medicine which consists of equal parts of sweet oil, vinegar, and zinziber (ginger), and they are mixed in one vessel, and heated over fire until the medicine becomes warm and reaches the consistency of honey.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then you take what is necessary from it and dissolve it in water and honey; and use that as an enema to cleanse the intestine, strengthen its openings, and leave the medicine inside for a quantity of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then extract that with a scraper; and do this for so many days until the intestine is cleansed and the swelling is reduced.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And sometimes it is cleansed with ash water when this medicine is not available to you; and that you take the ash of vines, put it into water; then strain it and use it as an enema until you are convinced that the intestine is now clean.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient does not tolerate Egyptian medicine or ash water, then use an enema of water and honey mixed with ground fennel seeds, and also use an enema of wine and honey mixed together, because honey has the property to cleanse and wash, and the wine makes the intestine adhere better, especially when the wine has excess astringency and dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you have done this several times and are convinced that the intestine is already reduced, then use an enema with something that promotes flesh growth in it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And it is that you take unguent of euphorbia and dissolve that with rose oil and styptic wine; or you administer that as an enema with some medicines and apply other ointments that have the properties which I have already written in the treatise on ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the sinus orifice is narrow in which the syringe of the enema cannot be received, then you gradually enlarge it with a small iron tool, and place over it linen wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it is enlarged.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And similarly, if the orifice is wide, then you should sew up the edges of it with stitches and leave an amount through which the enema can enter additionally.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the orifice from which the fluid flows is raised towards the upper parts, then dry it at the lowest point in it so that the fluid can flow out, for when the fluid is obstructed in the depth of the sinus, flesh may be generated there.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinus around the lower bone as you wish, then you must prepare the limb with a preparation by which the fluid flows out easily according to what is suitable for you and that no cause of blockage remains in it.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidating medicines that are placed over the sinus, appropriate for your purpose, and extend them over linen cloth.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the cloth should be of such quantity as to cover all of the sinus; then, using the scissors, make an incision in the right part of the sinus opening slightly wider than the sinus opening itself; and then spread another cloth under it according to the width of the cut, placing it at a distance from the long end of the sinus opening so that the discharge from the arm does not soil the large cloth, which should be changed only every few days once.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	And the one that is over the sinus opening should be changed frequently to ensure that whatever is discharged from the arm comes out properly.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And to determine whether what flows from the arm is too much or too little, or if it is well-digested or not-digested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And with this, you should consider the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if there is an abscess in it.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And as your treatment is prolonged in this manner, when you see the material that has been placed over the sinus opening already adhered or approaching adhesion, then change it every third day. When you remove the dressing, change the cloth and renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	And if from the sinus near that space there is a subtle virus present, then do not despair over its adhesion, for its healing approaches, because some people have delayed flesh generation in their wounds, and others experience the opposite effect.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if for several days an undigested mucus comes out from the sinus nearby, then know that the sinus is not adhering; and if the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and becomes a prolonged cause, then you should adjust towards drying medicines. And if the medicines are moist in their substance and virtue, they should be as dry as diafinicon [a type of ointment], when it is adjusted to remove excess addition of moisture.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the most recent method of treatment is to take ointment diafinicon and dissolve it in rose oil, and apply it over the affected area while warming it with your hands, and use it accordingly.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And it appears in that action, when there is no mucus, to take diafinicon ointment, honey which is boiled until it thickens, and use it; or take myrrh, aloes, and enses [a type of resin], grind all of them into a powder, and sprinkle it over the honey while it is on the fire. Then spread this mixture on a cloth and bind it over the sinus; or spread that with the honey which you have boiled until thickened, and sprinkle it over a cloth and bind it there.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And sometimes they are administered with aristologia longua and roots of the celestial lily (and it is indeed the celestial lily) and flour of iron and centaurea, and use those simples or compounds, grind them finely and sieve them, then powder them over honey which has been melted; and thus you use it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the sinus is prolonged and does not heal with this treatment, then you should know that the corruption is in the air passage of it, and now investigate the bones or other hard members or ligaments; then cure it with fistular treatment, as was said above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	On the treatment of whitlow, nail inflammation, and the incision and division of the finger.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Whitlow is an abscess that arises beneath the nail of the thumb or any other finger, and often appears in other fingers. As it prolongs and its treatment is less regarded, it can become a hardened abscess or be corrupted, leading to discharge that corrodes the root of the nail, corrupting not only the entire nail but also penetrating deeper to affect the bone, giving off a foul odor. The extremity of the finger becomes swollen, and its color turns dark.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And therefore when you have that area which we have mentioned in the division and do not find your treatment effective, then it is necessary for you to incise with an iron all the excess that remains of the nail and then cauterize the wound nearby, because a moving cautery is beneficial for this.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Here is the translation of the provided text:
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	If corruption has already begun in the bone, then you must cut into the bone and extract it, for it will never heal as long as the corrupted bone remains within.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if corruption and rot have spread to the finger, then you must cut it at one of the joints, depending on where the deterioration is expected, and then treat it until it heals.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	But if the nail suffers from impact or friction and there is severe pain in it, then at the beginning you must perform bloodletting on the patient, and then dry the nail with a sharp spatula using a transverse section from top to bottom. Be careful that the section does not penetrate into the flesh beneath the nail, for you would cause the patient severe pain, and it will lead to excessive growth of skin around the area; and then treat that area with something that relieves pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	However, the finger that is commonly found in many men is largely fleshy throughout, partly bony, and partly nail.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some of them are located at the base of the joint, or their growth is in certain joints of the fingers.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	And he who is born with strong knots in the said area does not suffer, but he who is born with weak joints there is afflicted.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those that are born fleshy, the incision is light, and it is such that you should cut through its base with a spatula-like instrument.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	More difficult is the cure for one who is born with a joint issue at its base; therefore, beware of amputating it.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And in one who is born with dislocated joints, you must incise the flesh at the beginning with a round incision inside the bone, and then cut with one of those suitable saws for this purpose, and afterwards care for it until it heals.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	More solidification that occurs in the said areas between the mottled spots or due to the nature of man who is born thus, or by solidification from plague or combustion from fire, or by similarity, then it is necessary to dry out that solidification before the said areas return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And then place between their sheets something smeared with oil rubbed so that they are not lightly hardened, and separate them from each other, or place between them a thin sheet of lead until it is properly consolidated. 
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly, if you encounter consolidation in the palm of any hand, then dry that consolidation according to how it is prepared and suited to the shape of the limb.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	From the inception of these issues, they are varicose veins.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Vices are varicose veins, and they are large, twisted veins filled with excessive melancholic fluids that appear in the limbs of the body, and they most commonly occur in the legs, especially in the legs of travelers, workers, and those who carry heavy loads.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Then it is necessary that you administer a purge of black bile several times with strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	The cure for them using iron is in two ways: one is to incise and draw out that black blood, and the other way is to elevate the vein and extract it entirely.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The section of the treatment is as follows: begin by washing the leg with hot water to dissolve the thick blood, which is a feculent in the leg. Then, bind the patient's leg tightly at the highest part of the thigh up to just below the knee with a bandage. Next, dry the vein at one or two or three spots using a wide drying technique. Then, draw out the black blood with your hand from below the leg upwards and downwards until the desired amount of blood is removed, which should be enough for the patient’s constitution to tolerate.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then apply water to her, and command her to abstain from foods that generate black bile. 
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And repeat the treatment by phlebotomy when the veins are full and this is noted in the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then dry the chain at the right spot on the vein for incision along its length or towards the back where you feel the heel pain, or at the lowest part where you feel the sole pain.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then apply the chain with hooks and press the vein from all sides until it appears visible, and you must assess the condition of what you see turning towards blackness.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And then when you remove and from the chain you take that white thing which is a cord.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then you should place that within an elevated and inclined container, and suspend it by one ounce of lion's fat.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then make another incision near that incision by three fingers, and then stretch the skin above the vein where it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then lift that and incise it in the rear section below the talus, and then extract it and elevate it until it is raised by the second incision, and then extract it from the incision that is above it.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do this until you extract it from the incision that is the highest or uppermost of all the incisions, until everything is raised; and then incise it.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you cannot extract and elevate it, then insert a strong double-threaded needle and tie and extract it, or insert the thread and rotate your hand in all directions until it is loosened.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And be careful that it is not cut; for if it is broken, it will be difficult for you to lift it out, and harm will come to the patient because of this damage.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And once you have completely removed it, then place on the wound site wool soaked in wine and ointment and unroasted oil, and treat it until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vein is contracted with tortuosity to which it coils in parts, and is not straight as we have said, then you must make incisions along all parts of its tortuosity and at the points where it coils, and then suspend it with hooks until you lift it entirely.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And be careful with your incision so that you do not cut into the vein and that you do not damage it, for it will be difficult for you to repair it; and use your discretion in this matter.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	It seems there might be a slight mix-up in the phrasing or language used in your sentence. Based on the context and the structure similar to medieval medical Latin or a Romance language, I will interpret and translate it as follows:
Forma de unci orp:	Forma de unci orp:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
De extraccio venae cruris.	From the extraction of the leg vein.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the thighs in warm lands, such as in Al-Andalus in the land of Arabs and in the warm and dry lands of India with little moisture, where there is no grass or tree.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And it is also generated in other parts of the body besides the thighs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And its generation is from putrefaction that comes from the blood, just as serpents, worms, lice, and other worms are generated between the blood and the flesh inside the body.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of susceptibility to the occurrence of this vein is that there is a violent inflammation in the thigh; then the area becomes blistered; and then the vein begins to emerge from the site of that blistering, which resembles a plant root.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then when its end appears, you must wrap it with a piece of lead weighing one dram over that area, and attach it in such a way that the lead hangs from the thigh.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And as many times as you draw any cause from the external parts, wrap that in lead and seal it.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the wound is prolonged, then you cut out a part of it and wrap up the remainder; and do not cut that which is tightly stretched until it is let out, for if you cut that which is contracted, it enters into the flesh and causes abscesses and pus formation in the area and bad ulceration.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	Because it is necessary that it be treated carefully and extracted little by little until it is completely removed from the wound, so that no cause for it remains in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein, in some men, it extends to a length of five palms and ten, and I have even heard of one reaching twenty palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is cut during its treatment, then insert the needle into the track of it and pierce that with a long stitch through the flesh until all that is in the material is evacuated, and apply putrefaction to the area for several days with medicines; then treat it according to the healing of abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein sometimes has branches, especially when it reaches the joint of the foot or in the foot itself, and it comes out with multiple openings, and each opening has its own branch.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And therefore treat it as we have said in the division and with what has been said above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	On the section concerning worms generated under the skin and it is called bovine disease.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is called in some places the bovine disease because small white spots appear on the buttocks, and it is a worm that originates between the skin and the flesh, and moves throughout the body up and down, and its presence is felt as it travels from one member to another until it breaks through the skin and comes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its generation is due to the putrefaction of certain humors, just as worms, serpents, and earthworms and ascarids are generated in the stomach.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared for its maliciousness, because when it moves through the body and rises to the head, reaching the eye, it then causes a strong itching in it and enters, destroying the eye, which results in white spots appearing.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And therefore, when you wish to treat it and extract it, you must do so based on its movement and appearance as sensed. Then, you must tightly bind what is above it and below it with ligatures and strong constriction, and then dry it out and extract it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is embedded in the flesh and you do not find it, then place a cautery with fire on the area where it lies, and the greatest fear is corruption of the wound, which corrupts the area as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	From the phrase "De sectione super aegritudinem nafir," we can infer that it is referring to a surgical procedure or incision in relation to an illness. A translation into English might be:
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This illness is called nafir in our land, and it is pain that comes to some members, and then it moves from member to member.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And I have already seen that second thing which I am going to recount.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was called to a sick woman in a village, and upon uncovering her arm, I saw a small swelling in the vein of her arm. After staying there for about an hour, I observed that this swelling moved like a worm going from one place to another, though more lightly than it should be, as if it were quicksilver moving from one place to another.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then the pain moved to that area and settled into the muscle, and remained there for about an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then it moved to the other arm before reaching the other side of the body.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then it returned to me that it was moving throughout her entire body as I observed; and I was greatly amazed by its transformation and the speed from one member to another.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had seen this before in my other patients in the same manner; however, I have seen many cases where the pain is transferred from one member to another.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But do not apply this with the fingers as in women.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I did not think it to be anything other than that which causes the woman to be infirm, or of dry body and exposed veins, and in this condition she feels this altered wind.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that this reverse cure does not appear in those who are delicate and have a moist body with engorged veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you want to treat him, and the patient feels that pain, then it does not appear to you as we have said, then you press on that area lightly and incise into where that compressed air is gathered, and cauterize the spot.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
De extraccio de sagetas.	Of arrow extraction.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are diverse according to their types, and according to the places in the body where they strike, for their diversity is such that some have large points, and small ones, and concave ones, and dull ones; and there are those with three angles, and those that have barbs; and there are those that have crossbars.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And that which depends on the members and parts where they strike is in two ways: for the members are either principal ones, such as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar; therefore when it strikes one of these members and signs of death appear to you, which cause I will explain shortly, then you should avoid extracting the arrow from those in whom death is imminent. And when these bad signs do not appear to you, and the arrow is not hidden deeply within the member, then you extract that arrow and treat the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And the signs of the brain are when an arrow strikes it and pierces the bone, and emerges from the socket which is above the brain, for it causes severe headache, blindness, dizziness, heat in the eyes, inflammation and heat of the tongue, spasms, confusion of understanding, vomiting bile, and speech is suddenly cut off and the voice destroyed, and there is discharged from the site of the wound a white moist substance resembling powder, and the appearance of the flesh takes on a bluish hue.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And when these signs appear to you, then abstain from the treatment and extraction of the arrow, unless it is necessary.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	And the signs of the arrow when it strikes the heart, so that it is near the left breast, and you feel that it is fixed in a hard place, and not in a soft area; and the movement of the arrow is similar to the pulse's movement, and black blood flows from the wound, and there is coldness in the extremities, and cold sweat, and fainting; therefore, know that death descends swiftly.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the signs when the arrow has wounded the lung are spitting of foamy blood from the wound, and the vessels near the neck are inflamed, and the color of the patient changes, and they expire a large spirit, and they seek a draught of fresh air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow strikes the membrane that is in the feet, and the pain is then near the small bones, and there is great swelling with intense pain and sighing, and not all the muscles of the limbs are affected.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if you find a dart (or arrow) in the stomach, then quickly remove any undigested food from the wound.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the arrow is shot into the belly and is embedded in it, make some incision at the wound site, either through the skin or the intestine that has been ruptured, and there is no hope for the extraction of the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow hits the bladder, and urine flows out, and some process or cause from within leads to parts outside, and there is great pain upon the patient, then you know that it is mortal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	And the other parts as well, such as the face, neck, jaw, shoulders, arms, vertebrae of the back, collarbone, thigh, chest, and similar body parts, are saved according to the greater dispositions when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery and is not a venomous arrow.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I will recount to you what I have observed about the nature of these arrows, so that you may understand this in relation to your treatment.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	This is the cause: once an arrow pierced through the lacrimal duct of one eye near the nasal root, and I extracted it from the other side, leaving the earlobe intact, and he was healed without any damage to his eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I extracted another arrow from a Jew who was struck in the area near his eye, leaving the eyelid partially intact. The arrow was already embedded deeply, and only a small part of it could be grasped to pull it out along with its shaft. It was a large, sharp Turkish arrow, with a lion-shaped iron head that had no barbs.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And it is beneficial for the patient, and not accidental in his health a bad accident.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man who had been shot in the jaw, which was an Arabic arrow, and it was that kind with ears; and then I cut around it between two molars, as it was already submerged in his jaw; and then I carefully removed it with that, and then I extracted it, and the Christian was healed.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And he extracted another arrow from a man who had been shot in his belly, and they thought that he would die because of that; and thus, after thirty days had passed and there was no change in his condition due to any cause related to his disposition, he cut around the arrow and manipulated it, and he was healed, and no bad accident happened to him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw another man in whom an arrow had embedded itself in his back, and the wound had become solidified over it; and after approximately seven years, the arrow was embedded in the root of his thigh.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman in whom an arrow had embedded itself in her belly, and the wound had solidified around it; and there was no change in her condition because of it, and the woman did not experience any harm in any of her natural functions.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And I saw another man in whom an arrow had embedded itself in his face, and the wound had solidified around it; he broke off the arrow, experiencing no pain from it, and similar cases have been observed.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And he extracted the arrow from the man, who was a principal of the king, with the arrow embedded in the middle of his nose, which had slightly shifted to the right side, and the entire arrow was hidden inside.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called for his treatment shortly after the arrow wound within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I found the arrowhead deeply embedded; and then I searched for it with a subtle probe, but did not feel it; however, he felt a pricking sensation at his right ear, and then I suspected that this pricking was due to the tip of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And apply the area with a poultice that has attractive and digestive properties, believing that the area will become inflamed because it appears to me that the area of the arrowhead will dry out on top of it. 
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And no accident occurs at the significant location where the arrow has reached that spot; and I continue with the plaster on it for several days without an accident happening; and the wound consolidates in the meantime, and you remove the patient from the extension of it for a period of several days before one day they feel the arrow inside their nose and report this to me.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then I apply over the wound sharp and corrosive medicine for several days within which time I open it up, and with a probe I examine that area, and find the tip of the subtle arrowhead, which adheres to the shaft.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then I adjust in the wound's opening with that sharp medicine until the tip of the arrowhead becomes visibly apparent to me, and I proceed at my own pace with this for a period of time between four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And then increase the fire to amplify it, and make it possible to insert the scissors into it, and remain in that position, and do not obey the desire to withdraw, because I did not cease to delicately manipulate and ingeniously work on it with various means of skill, until one day I managed to grasp it firmly with forceps designed for this purpose, as will be shown at the end of the chapter, after which I extracted it; and then restored that wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors judged that the nasal cartilage could not be restored, but I restored it and the wound was consolidated, and the patient was healed completely, without any cause for failure.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recommend to you the quality of extracting certain arrows for which you should pause and consider the meaning behind what I have not said, because the parts of this art and the definitions thereof are not understood through mere narration nor are they fully comprehended by reading the book.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the wise artisans compare a little with much; and what is present with what is absent; and they find new operations and new instruments by tracing back to the strange causes of the craft when it occurs.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore I say that arrows are not removed from the limbs in which they are embedded except in two ways: either by attraction to the place where they entered; or by the opposite end of the other side.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is expelled from the place where it entered, or is a discharge coming out of fleshly parts, and is thrown out and forced outward.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if it does not follow the excretion at the time of catharsis, then you should leave it for several days until the flesh around it decays and the attraction to it is lessened and its exit is eased.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And similarly, if it is embedded in bone and does not follow the excretion, then leave it for several days and repeat the process of attraction and movement each day until it is forced out.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if it does not follow the excretion after several days, then you must pierce around the area where the discharge is embedded in the bone from all sides with a fine drill until the area of the discharge is enlarged, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the discharge is embedded in the bone of the head and has progressed into one of the brain ventricles, and the patient exhibits several of those symptoms that I mention, then refrain from extracting the discharge and leave it until the condition stabilizes over several days; for if the discharge reaches the spine, death will not be long delayed.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is not embedded in the body of the bone but only in it and does not pass into the marrow, and the patient remains for several days without any accident befalling them from those causes, then you should focus on the entry point of the arrow and on the wound itself.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	If it is a deep puncture wound and does not respond to extraction, then apply tourniquets around the area of the arrow as we have recommended, and subsequently care for the site until it heals.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	But if the arrow is already embedded in the body and is not felt, then you should probe for it; and if you feel it, then pull it out using instruments that are suitable for extraction.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot reach it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the shaft, and there are no bones, nerves, or veins in the way, then you should enlarge the wound until it is possible to extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if there are barbs with which it is held, then you should cut the flesh in which it is embedded entirely using all the skill you can muster; and devise a method to release the flesh from the barbs through breaking or twisting them until they comply.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the arrow from whichever location it is in, then use the strength of your hand and forceps to make it comply; be careful with subtle maneuvers so that the arrow does not break and to ensure that the extraction is not made difficult for you.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot do that at your appointed time, then leave it for several days until the parts around it can heal, and then repeat the procedure when the area has been relieved.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	And if there is bleeding from a wound that opposes you, then administer what we have said about treatment in its respective chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And be mindful of your skill in dealing with vein or nerve, or tendon injuries, and administer aid in every possible way to prevent the arrow's effects; and do this with ease, calmness, slowness, and firmness as I have recommended to you.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And thus, make the arrowhead contract so that the patient is placed according to the figure in which you should apply the heat of the cautery to them, for it is more beneficial.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	But if this is not possible for you, then administer whatever is possible for you according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	But for arrows that have penetrated from the opposite side or where some part of it already extends outside, or if the tip of the arrow feels slimy above the chain (presumably a reference to an anatomical structure), and sometimes this area protrudes; then you should cut into that area; make the incision according to how much the forceps can grasp; then pull it out, for it is made easy to extract in this way.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if it is retained in the bone, then you twist it according to the opposition where the arrow presses into the bone, and widen it as you insert, and then extract it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if not, leave it for several days, and then repeat the process until it comes out.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the shaft of the arrow is in there, then you push it out with it.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the shaft has fallen off and you wish to administer an impulse, then you insert it; if it is deaf (blunt), use a concave instrument so that it enters the cavity of the arrow's head and then push it out with it.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	And if the arrow is concave, then you push it out with a strong instrument inserted into it, for the arrow is loosened by that.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the arrow is embedded, then you must hollow out all the flesh in which it is lodged, if that is possible for you, and then treat it with whatever is appropriate.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the arrow strikes in the feet, or in the abdomen, or in the bladder, or in the side, and is close enough that you can touch it with your hand, and it is possible to cut around it, then cut around it and be careful of vein or nerve injury, and extract it; then dress the wound if needed, and care for it until it heals.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Form of forceps with which arrows are extracted:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Let the ends of them be like a bird's beak, which are made like pincers to grasp the arrow so that they do not let it go.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And of those, various special sizes are made, large, small, and medium, according to the size of the arrowhead and its thickness, and the width of the wound, and the constriction of the area.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Form of a concave implement at this end curved like a bird's beak so that the insertion of the arrow is eased within it, and the impact of its removal:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Form of treatment for a numb extremity:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	And in this manner, so that the instrument inside him is lightened in the concave groove and is pushed by it.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	From the text provided and the structure of the language used, it seems like an early Romance language with influences from medieval Latin. Here's a translation attempt for the given line:
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins used for phlebotomy, of which there are typically thirty, with sixteen located in the head. Among these are two pulsating veins near the ears called alhasisain; two herbs that appear on both temples; and two veins in each tear duct of the two forward-facing eyes called aspicientz; a vein prepared at the center of the forehead; a vein at the end of the nose; two veins at the neck; two veins above the lip; two veins below the lip; — these are the veins referred to as algelic; and there are also two veins behind the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	Here is the translation of the provided text into English:
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot and thigh there are three veins; one of them is below the curvature of the wild fig's root; and the second is sophena, and its location is below the thigh of the domestic fig; and the sciatic vein, and its location is below the thigh of the wild fig; and in the thigh are other veins similar to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The healing of veins near the ears is for ancient and emigrant catarrhs, and scaly and ulcerous conditions of old wounds on the head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of bleeding those [patients] is according to what I recommend to you: shave the head of the patient, and rub the back of the patient's head at the occiput in the location where both veins are with a wide cloth using good friction; then tighten the patient’s neck with a band so that both veins appear near their positions close to the ears at two points below the head; seek those [veins] with your finger, and if you feel the pulse of those [veins] with your finger, this is a sign through touch.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then take the lancet, which is the appropriate instrument, and then insert it into the vein until the bloodletting reaches the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	Then raise your hand with the vein and the band above the area, and incise the vein with an appropriate incision.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And the length of the incision should be about two fingers' width or around that; and let as much blood flow as you wish.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then press with pillows and leave it until it is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And it has already been mentioned at the beginning of the book about these and their cautery procedure.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	And of the two arteries that are in the temple, the relief from phlebotomy is for ancient migraines and chronic evil, and frequent ophthalmia and acute superfluous effusions to the eyes.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of performing phlebotomy on them is as I recommend to you: constrain the patient's neck with motion so that the two veins appear by palpation, clearly manifest and their pulse can be demonstrated with your finger; then you shall proceed to test.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then you raise the chain above the vein at points higher up with your index finger, and introduce the flebotomi (phlebotomy instrument) gently, and lift the vein upwards; and cut it in this way as you have done for the other two veins; and let blood flow according to the quantity needed.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then release the constriction on the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, and then apply a bandage and poultice and tighten it above with strong pressure, and leave it until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And the recall of them has already preceded, and from that the incision, and the attraction at the beginning of the book. 
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And therefore the treatment of venesection from the frontal vein is similar to the venesection of the cephalic vein for old diseases of the face and migraine and heat and foul ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of the phlebotomy is as I recommend to you: so that the patient holds their neck with a band until the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is called a lancet, of which this is the form:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Place the pointed end of the instrument at the head of the vein and strike it with a hammer or some other means in the manner described, and let the blood flow according to the amount you desire; then close the puncture wound of the patient and strengthen that area until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And sometimes it is opened with a flebotomi (bloodletting instrument) made of metal, but the flebotomi should not have an acute end like other flebotomis; instead, its end should be flattened, and use it transversely because the bone is very close and strong, and it would break if the flebotomi were too thin.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	However, the treatment of the two veins that are near the tear ducts of both eyes for eye ailments caused by itching and inflammation in the eyes, and for facial illnesses.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	The method of bloodletting is that the patient should hold their head with a bandage, and then perform the bloodletting; you should stand above the patient's head while doing this.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And the bloodletting should be performed transversely and slightly along the length with a small bloodletting instrument, because there is no flesh in that area; if the bloodletting instrument is too thin, its end could easily break.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then let blood flow as much as is necessary for you, and place bandages over those areas, bind them tightly for one night, and then loosen them.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	And the venesection of the nasal vein is appropriate for acute fever and violent heat, and for illnesses of the face and migraine and inflammation that occur in the face, especially when it is chronic.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the procedure of the bloodletting is that the patient holds their head and you place your left hand on their nose, then take a fine long lancet and insert it in the middle part of the nasal tip precisely, because the vein is not visible to the touch there, and the blood will start to flow immediately.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	You must withdraw your hand with the lancet little by little and let blood flow according to your need; then bind it for one night, because it heals quickly.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	However, bloodletting from both arms is beneficial for alleviating asthma and the onset of leprosy and various other diseases, impetigo, and severe corrosive ulcers, as well as herpes.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of the phlebotomy for them is that the patient stretches each one out in their own direction with a ligature; and the surgeon stands over the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a stool.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And then perform venesection on the vein with a small, wide lancet little by little; and then extract blood in a measured quantity or according to what you deem necessary for that case; and then do the same with the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then loosen the ligature and tighten the two veins with a moderate tourniquet so that the patient is not suffocated, and leave it in place until the plague is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the benefit of venesection from the larger veins is to address small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums, bad ulcers and cracks, and also bad ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of the venesection is such that you make the patient sit in front of you, and tie a band around their neck. Then spread the lips apart and look at the two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the second on the left; the indication for each is by the darkness of each of both, and this is more evident where small black veins are around them. And then incise each vein with an appropriate incision.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	And if you have doubt and do not know which one it is, then proceed with an incision on the larger of those, and from that, the pus will clearly manifest.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make the appearance of the two veins that are on the lips above.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	But it is more customary to incise the two veins that are on the lower lip.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	But for the two veins that are below the tongue, the treatment is often to perform phlebotomy on the cephalic vein for premonitory signs in the throat, diseases of the uvula, and other ailments of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of phlebotomizing those veins is such that you should place the patient between your hands facing the sunlight, lift the tongue, and look beneath it; on one side of the tongue there is a vein and on the other side another vein, and the color of each tends towards blackness.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then phlebotomize each one; be careful not to linger with your hand while phlebotomizing those veins, for beneath them are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the veins that are bled from in the thigh are those which customarily flow throughout all men, and their bleeding is done in two ways: either by using a lancet with a fine point; or by cutting with a scalpel blade, and this method is called alnessil, and this is its form:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this particular instrument is what you should use for the incision, and of these kinds are slender and fine according to the width of the veins and according to the tightness of those. 
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Forma de fleubotomi mirti:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	And here is the translation of the provided line:
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the form of olive oil phlebotomy:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this flebotomi is of lesser width and has a finer tip, and it is suitable for flebotomy of fine veins that contain subtle blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	And the benefit of vein phlebotomy of the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: for extracting blood from diseases that are below the shoulders and neck, and from what affects the feet and belly.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it is necessary for the phlebotomist, when performing bloodletting on that area, to be very careful and have great caution, because in that spot there lies an artery. If he makes a mistake and pierces with the phlebotomy needle at that point, he will cut through that artery and cause a flow of blood; therefore, it is necessary not to puncture that area with the phlebotomy needle but rather to use a cutting instrument first.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilic vein does not appear through clear manifestation, then you must leave that area and move to another one, or seek some other place; or perform bloodletting at the end of the arm where it is visible; and puncture that area with a phlebotomy needle as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	But if you wish to perform phlebotomy on the patient, then before constricting the arm, touch the area between where you know the pulse is located, and then press on it with your thumb; and then extend the arm and puncture the vein with a concave incision using a phlebotomy needle as we have said; and be careful not to hit the artery within any part of that area.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you see, as you tighten the bandage, swelling in the place that you have marked with your finger, then that swelling is arterial swelling, and thus it should be treated accordingly.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you see the blood flow during phlebotomy as fine as a child's urine and the blood is clear red, then you know it is arterial blood; and then you wait and place your finger on that spot for a long time; and then remove your finger, and if the blood flows in spurts, which appears broken or interrupted several times, then you tighten the arm and leave it alone.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And guard the patient from their own discharge, and be above the fear of it, and do not neglect this for any number of days until they are healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	And if the blood flow is not stopped, and there are times when medicine is not available to you, then cut into the artery, if it is accessible; for the extremity of the condition has contracted, and the blood flow must be stopped; or take a piece of fig bark, prepare that, take one half, and press that over the vein with tension using a bandage and with poultices until the next day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the blood flow is stopped, that is good; and if not, then treat it with methods that have been previously remembered for stopping blood flow at the site of bleeding wounds.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And stopping the blood flow is difficult in many situations due to the small area of the wound and the possibility of binding the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	However, for the dark vein, phlebotomy is useful for drawing blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body; because it is composed of branches of the basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And in phlebotomy (bloodletting), it is necessary to be aware of the superficial vein through which one performs bloodletting because there lies a nerve; and when you adjust at the point of puncture in bloodletting, if you find the nerve, it will cause stupor or paralysis, making healing difficult for him, and often he cannot be fully healed. This nerve sometimes appears to the sense; and if it is hidden from some people because it is subtle and not easily seen, then you must place your phlebotomy instrument, which you use for bloodletting, with a slice of alnessil (a type of herb), and avoid the nerve with your skill.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then you should incise the vein along its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The benefit of bloodletting from the cephalic vein is that it draws blood from the head and helps with ailments of the eyes.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And it is appropriate in this case, if you want the bloodletting to be performed with an olive lancet or a myrtle lancet; for it is the safest of all veins because there are no arteries or nerves nearby.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	And yet, it is necessary for you to perform the phlebotomy such that with the phlebotomy needle, you do not just puncture the head of the vein, but seek the place that seems lighter, and do not touch it if it is not found on the first percussion, which should be made several times over the area where the phlebotomy will occur.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, sometimes an abscess is present in some people, when it is not found during the first attempt at phlebotomy, and you should not touch that abscess.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	However, the quality of the phlebotomy in that case and its consequences are matters that you must consider in their correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first thing you should know is that phlebotomy is administered only for the preservation of health and with hope and caution regarding the onset of diseases. Phlebotomy should be performed on one of the veins in the arm, namely: cephalic, basilic, or median. Phlebotomy should be done at the beginning of spring, on an empty stomach in spring and autumn, and in winter close to a meal when signs of repletion appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And if phlebotomy is performed, it should be done on the third day or at least three hours after the first pus appears.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	More phlebotomy which is administered, more when it causes convenience and necessity for that, whether at night or during the day, at any hour and at any time.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And it is necessary that a child not be circumcised until they are fourteen years old, and a pregnant woman should not be circumcised except from the fourth month until the seventh, and elderly women should not be circumcised who have already passed sixty years.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And when someone wishes to undergo bloodletting by any method whatsoever, it is necessary to clean their intestines before the bloodletting with a lion'sclyster, if there are retained fragments or mucus within them, so that the veins do not draw out excesses during the bloodletting of the cleaned intestines, which could harm the main limbs.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And here is the translation of the given line:
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And then consider the filtration of humors before this if the blood is thick, with foods and drinks, and with medicines if it is possible to do so.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And then enter into a bath if there is no cause that prohibits it, or be exercised by some exercise so that the blood may be refined.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And perform the bloodletting in the morning of the day, around the hour of terce (about 9 AM), as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And take care that the patient is protected on that day from all evil accidents of the soul, such as anguish, anger, fear, and from all bodily accidents, such as excessive labor, unnecessary pain, and similar things.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And in his diet, there should be present the causes to which it is customary for people to use aromatics and fragrances, as well as balms and similar things according to the extent of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And let the bloodletter sit on a cushion that is higher than the cushion of the person who is to be bled.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And then extract his arm, and have the phlebotomist rub that area with their hand two or three times; then tie the ligature with a strap and wrap it around twice.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And let the binding be moderate, for when the binding is not equal, or the binding is due to excess, then prohibit blood flow; or use softening, and then prevent the body's emission of blood.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And then for the binding, it is necessary that the person to be bled rub their hands together until the veins are swollen and clearly visible.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And then the phlebotomist should anoint their lancet with a little of the proper oil; and then place their index finger of the left hand on that vein, at the spot where they intend to perform the phlebotomy, so that the vein protrudes slightly, and the pulsation is felt as one of the veins you find will be taut like a string and should be bled from, while those filled with air retract when the lancet is placed on them and thus should not be bled; and if the lancet does not penetrate the vein, then that vein is narrow.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And thus, for this reason, it is necessary that the phlebotomist be firm and diligent in all these matters.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And then remove the flebotomi, but if the vein is opened in one go, that is good; and if not, you repeat this another time after leaving that place a little, or over it with a compress, if the area is not inflamed. 
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the area is abscessed, or the patient is frightened, then you leave it for a day or two, and do not tighten the bandage, because pulling on it will likely cause an abscess to form, nor should they enter into a bath.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And then repeat the phlebotomy if necessary. 
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the incision is small and blood flows subtly, and you fear that not enough blood will come out as desired, then you should repeat phlebotomy in that area according to what is right and adjust at the incision slightly, and do this with haste before the area becomes inflamed, for once the area is inflamed in most cases a smaller incision should be made.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	But if you find that area already inflamed, then do not repeat the procedure on it, for it will not provide any benefit to you; and apply some part of an ointment over it, for it alleviates the body from blood.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better in this case to use oil and the other ointments.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And similarly, apply ointment in all phlebotomies where you bleed the veins to reduce blood from the body, and use theriac, alfadoc, and sagzenea when one of these is placed on the area, for it refines the blood and dissolves it when it is thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if a large inflammation is generated at the site of phlebotomy, which often happens, especially to those who have not been bled before or where the vein incision was small, then you should treat it by placing a sponge soaked in water and salt, slightly warmed, over the area for about an hour, as this helps dissolve the inflammation.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And this must be done near the emergence of the blood from that vein, with the completion of it or another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if there remains in the area for several days some blackness or greenish color, do not worry about that; and if you wish, place over it some mixture of aloes and myrrh dissolved, or some mixture of mint juice or calamint or similar to it.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And when white spots appear, incisions and elevations should be made by bloodletting from the basilic vein.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And then place your hand on that area, and if you find softness there, apply your compression on it; for that elevation is harmful and bad; and therefore be careful not to put pressure on it due to what we have said, because strong pressure will cause blood to flow from the artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And make a poultice with something that is astringent, so that the area becomes hardened, and then treat it with other healing methods until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And it is necessary to withdraw blood from every person according to the amount of their strength and according to the predominant color of the blood as it appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	For if the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red; and similarly, if you see it thick, let it flow until it becomes thin; and likewise, if it is sharp, let it flow until its sharpness is diminished.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And for those who are full and strong and have a need for blood extraction in one session, the incision of the vein should be enlarged and the bloodletting should be extensive.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And in one who is cold, the opposite should be done of that, and it must extract that in several regular stages, and its course should be direct.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best method administered in venesection is that it should be a transverse cut, not a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this method of venesection is safe from blood flow and nerve damage, and it is more praised and safer than venesection along the length or width.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And it is customary for syncope to occur after venesection, and you should treat this before the venesection with a bit of bread infused in pomegranate juice or simply heated oxymel; and draw the blood in three or four separate times.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if it is chilled due to composition, then take before venesection bread soaked in myrrh syrup or in aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar, or in an aromatic and fragrant syrup.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if syncope occurs after venesection and is caused by the loss of much blood, then it is necessary to drink water from flesh and a very fragrant subtle syrup; and use aromatics with alguae, and anoint their feet with that.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division in the chapter on syncope for evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And for who wishes to bleed their arm and dissolve their blood a second time, it is suitable for one for whom phlebotomy is a minor evacuation, and its property is cold, which evacuates the blood little by little, according to the quantity of the property over consecutive days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	And if one wishes to bleed their arm and draw their blood a second time, and their body is strong, then do this approximately seven or nine hours after the first phlebotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	And if one wishes to draw the blood from their body away from the part to which it tends to decline, it is necessary to bleed them on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	And for that body in which the blood is already heated and is acute and causes fever, it is necessary to draw a large quantity of blood at once and increase the incision before syncope occurs, provided that you have maintained all the conditions of phlebotomy; and place your hand on the patient’s pulse to prevent death instead of syncope, for often this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And when you want to unbind the arm and evacuate blood a second time, since the vein's orifices are already closed and it has become difficult for the blood to flow out, that you press on it forcefully and slightly extend the bent area, for this is too harmful.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament;
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is inflamed, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the inflammation has subsided.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if the necessity arises to perform secondary bloodletting, and there is no excuse not to, then you should bleed that area at that location or in the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called the "sinew of the arm" is incised at the site of the fossa or the basilic vein, when those are not found or are hidden, as it is composed of those veins.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of the bloodletting is such that the patient should dip their hand in warm water until the skin becomes reddened and the vein appears clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And then apply moderate tension on that area with a bandage; and then perform the bloodletting transversely, not longitudinally or latitudinally.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And let the incision be wide, and make your bloodletting such that you perform it slightly above the joint of the hand.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if you need to stop the flow of blood, then you should dip your hand in warm water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve what is necessary.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	If you are in the days of summer, then you are excused from the repetition of hand immersion in warm water, and instead, the body is bathed in warm water during the winter time.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than that of all other veins, because there are no pulsating veins nor nerves here.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And phlebotomy of the right hand vein is relevant to diseases of the liver. 
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of the phlebotomy is that you stretch your hand with a bandage or with your own hand, after having placed it in hot water, until the vein becomes swollen and clearly visible; then perform the venesection across it; and if you cut through it entirely without damaging anything, this is well done.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And take care not to move your hand during the phlebotomy, because doing so could expose the nerves of the fingers without skin.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	Then dip your hand in hot water and let the blood flow into it, because if you do not dip it in hot water, the blood will clot at the opening of the vein and prevent the flow.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when the required amount of blood has been extracted, then place oil and salt over the vein so that it does not close too quickly; similarly, you should do this for all straight cuts.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	However, the benefit of performing phlebotomy on the left hand is that it is beneficial for ailments of the spleen.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And similarly in the phlebotomy of the same as you have done in the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the usefulness of the saphenous vein phlebotomy is for diseases that are in the lower part of the body, such as diseases of the womb, and for the retention of menses, and for diseases of the sores and ulcers on thighs and old wounds on hips, and similar kinds of diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of the phlebotomy is such that the patient should insert their foot into warm water and perform friction until the veins become visible; then tie above the ankle with a bandage; and at the site where the vein becomes clearly visible, you should place your finger, and from there it branches out in multiple directions on the surface of the foot.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And then perform phlebotomy on the largest branch below the knee where the swelling is, as it is better and more beneficial.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you perform phlebotomy on the surface of the foot, then be careful of the nerves that are below and on the surface of the foot, and place your incision such that you cut across it, as if you were going to dissect it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And let it be the venesection yourself.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	And if bleeding is prohibited, then you soak the foot in hot water and allow the blood to flow so that it can be evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the phlebotomist errs in the first attempt, then repeat the phlebotomy slightly further, for the area is salty; and do not fear malevolence, but rather guard against the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And similarly apply the sulfur to the other foot equally. 
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And regarding the sciatic vein, the location is as we have said, below the ankle and away from the wild part of the division.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the treatment for hip pain when it is due to blood corruption is phlebotomy. 
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient enters into a bath, and they bind and stretch the thigh of the patient from the side of the ankle upwards with four fingers above a long thin bandage, for it appears only by this means.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And therefore when it appears, then you perform a flebotomy (bloodletting) on that area according to each case as is possible for you and across the transverse area, which is better; or incise that area with an incision or cut that area with a sectioning, for the location of it is suitable.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is in many people somewhat hidden; and if you find that area and it does not appear clearly to the senses, then perform bloodletting on some branch of it, which is the one that appears on the back of the foot instead of the line leading to the little toe and the ring toe.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And be careful of the nerves, and let the amount of blood flow that you desire.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Then release the constriction and place something over the site of the bloodletting, compressing the area, for it is quickly healed.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Regarding ventilation and the qualities of using those methods.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Ventosas are made of horns, or of iron, or of glass.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And bloodletting by suction (ventozacio) is performed in two ways: one of them is with incision and extraction of blood, and the other is suction without incision.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this ventilation that is its scarification is according to two methods, for it can be done with fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And for the bleeding or bloodletting applied with incision and extraction of blood, there are fourteen sites on the body. Among these, one where cupping is placed is alnocrati, which is the back part of the head; and another location from both sides of the neck as well; and cupping on the chin below the jaw, away from the mouth; and cupping on both armpits; and cupping on alohoster, which is above the ribs; and cupping on two flanks, which are both arms; and cupping on both calves; and cupping on both thighs. 
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And in bloodletting, you do not extract the blood from the small veins scattered throughout the flesh, and by doing so, you do not diminish their strength as it happens with phlebotomy; nor should bloodletting be performed with fire or without fire in any disease caused by excess until the entire body is evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	And if the necessity of bloodletting is provoked by illness or continuously, administer it at any time at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, in the middle of the month, and at any time.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause is that among men there are those in whom blood is multiplied to the point where it needs to be extracted by bloodletting and they find heaviness and heat in their head; and of these, some experience swelling and inflammation in their face, head, and neck; and of these, some have sharp pain in their face and forehead, along with dimness and dullness in their eyes; and there are those who designate the site for bloodletting; and among them, their sneezing is increased; and of these, they find a taste of blood in their mouth, or their tongue is swollen and spits out blood; and of these, their sleep is abundant, and some see blood in their dreams, heat, and other plagues and similar causes.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore, when dealing with any of those causes, and specifically if it is in the third month or a bit later, then I command that ventilation be performed more than two or three hours after daybreak.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And the treatment for windiness in the neck is that when you apply pressure to the head and cause it to sink into the pillows; however, it should be done close to a complete evacuation of the whole body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this cupping is in the location of the cephalic vein incision.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not good for someone of a cold complexion to use it, or in cases where there is catarrh, because it causes great harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And by this, it is not necessary to use those old methods, and in which heads such fresh illnesses are.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	And to that person, where the treatment is continuously applied on them, forgetfulness (or loss of sensation) occurs; and because of this, you must command the cupper (the person using the cupping technique) to pause their hand slightly from the cupping at the areas where it's happening, fearing the generation of forgetfulness (loss of sensation).
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	Here is the translation line by line:
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And it is necessary for the suction cup to be slightly heated with alcohol, because if left in place, it can cause weakness in the body and stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the application of cupping to the nape alleviates headaches, ophthalmia, migraine, suffocation, and pain in the roots of the teeth; and it serves as a substitute for bleeding from the basilic vein.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And you must command the cupper not to press his hand too hard during the procedure so as not to cut into the artery and cause a flow of blood.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And cupping applied to the chin alleviates hiccups in the mouth, corruption of the gums, and conditions resembling other illnesses in the mouth; it serves as a substitute for bloodletting from the arteries located under both lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	And cupping applied to both armpits alleviates caphatan, which is caused by an excess of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And cupping applied to both sides inside the thighs provides the benefit of bloodletting from three veins, namely the basilic, saphenous, and cephalic veins, because it draws blood from all those smaller veins in the flesh and from the finer veins of the larger veins until the attraction reaches the three main veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the surgeon not to proceed too much in scarification, for the area is devoid of flesh, and leave its nerves and arteries untouched.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is a leech with which one is bled over the legs and applied to the hemorrhoids of the anus and to the pus-producing ulcers.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And it is necessary to command the leecher to make a large leeching, and that it be of elm, for the area requires strong drying; and perform the subtle leechings forcefully and let it be scarified with scarification.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	Here is the translation of the provided line:
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, fever weakens the whole body and causes fainting in many people.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And for the treatment of hernias, it is commonly applied to the hernias on both sides of the abdomen.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the placement of the cupping is that you place the cup at the beginning and suction it with moderate force, and do not prolong the placement of the cups; instead, place them lightly, remove them gently, so that the humors come to the area by gradual means.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not stop repeating this and continue until you see the area already reddened and swollen, and that the coagulation of the blood appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then you should scratch [the area] and gradually repeat the suction little by little, and also take into account the condition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	For that person who has delicate flesh and few pores, you should scratch them once and not more, so that the area does not become ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And instruct the cupper to increase the scratching slightly and to apply suction with ease.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if there is coarseness in the blood, then it is necessary to perform scarification twice, for in the first instance the path for subtle extraction of the blood and its moisture is opened.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	But in the second examination obtained from the extraction of thick blood. 
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the blood is very thick, then a third incision should be made so that it can achieve the desired outcome.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And finally, when we want to extract blood slowly or in small amounts, a scarification is enough for us.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we do so with a large scarification; and if we know that the blood is thick, then we must scarify with an extensive scarification.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term "scarification" refers solely to the depth of the incision.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the vein is thick, hard, dark, and its pores are narrow, it is necessary that the areas for cupping be anointed more gently, opened up, and resolved; in summer, such as with aloes oil or violet oil, or double almond oil, or colt's foot oil; and in winter, then use narcissus oil, or lily oil, or camomile oil, or blood oil, and similar ones.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the excess is thick and cold, then the oil should be marjoram oil, or balsamite oil, or aloes oil, or anise oil, and similar ones.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	And if the bloodletting site has large pores of tender flesh, then it must be prohibited from using oil, and it is necessary that at this place where the bloodletting marks are close to the bleeding area they should be washed with lukewarm water or with cold fresh water, or with water boiled with chickweed, or with water of buttercups, and similar things for these.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And for the one whose blood has too much moisture, wash their bloodletting sites with sour wine, or with water of myrtle and sumac and similar things to these.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And for the one whose excesses are thick, wash their bloodletting sites with old wine, or with water of sage, which is marjoram, or from the decoction of dill, or chamomile, and things similar to these.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And it must be guarded before bathing; usually, it should be administered close to the bath time, about one or two hours beforehand, and they should rest near the bloodletting site.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What must be regulated is the bloodletting before the application of cupping.
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And restrict their food as if with ropes, and serve them bird meats, and foods seasoned with herbs, and the like.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And for one whose condition is feverish, it is necessary that they drink almond syrup or aniseed syrup made from crushed seeds, and sumac, and sweet-smelling wine mixed between old and new; and it should be recommended to them to use moderation in drinking and eating, and avoid foods such as poultry, hemp seeds, and small birds and pigeons.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And it is necessary that on the day of bloodletting and cupping, drinking should be more than eating.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And it is necessary that at certain hours, some people should be given to drink theriaca alpharac, or medicines of musk, such as mastic, or alcelita before bloodletting or cupping, or afterward, so that the main limbs are comforted and the blood is refined; and they should not take those that are heated.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	But the bleedings that are performed by incision should be applied to the spleen, and on the liver and gout, and on the navel, at the sites of the joints, and the plexus of the groin, because these parts cannot withstand incisions on them.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not desired for those but to draw blood from the limb, just as we place a cupping glass on the breast in illness of nosebleed; and we use that to dissolve cold viscous air trapped within the limb, much like placing [a cupping glass] over the abdomen and navel; because that rarefies the limb, warms it, and removes the pain when we resolve air.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is already placed on the lungs when you encounter their congestion or phlegm, because by virtue of strong attraction it overcomes congestion and eliminates the phlegm from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And similarly, it acts when placed on the liver and spleen to dispel air trapped within those organs.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these cupping glasses are applied only with suction; and sometimes they are applied with heat.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And sometimes they are applied filled with warm water in diseases of the spleen.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And this is done so that the cupping glass may be filled and become larger, whether it is hot water alone or water in which suitable herbs for this purpose are boiled.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of cupping administered with fire: the diameter of the opening should be two fingers wide, according to how we have formed it; and the amount of air should be half a palm; and it should be placed on his side, in the area that is around, halfway, the hole should be small so that an needle can enter into it.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Made of linen or citrus fabric, with thick edges, smooth and even so that it does not shift the limb from its position on it. 
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And in the middle of a transverse bar of iron or of wood, a candle is placed with fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this cupping glass is larger than the one we have recommended; and it should be smaller than that according to the illness and the age of the person using it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the cupping glasses for children and those who are weakened are different from those for young people and those with large, robust bodies.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of applying this cupping glass with fire on the limb is to extend a strip of cloth over a small candle of wax, and place that in the middle of the transverse bar at the center of the cupping glass, so that the fire is lit around it without burning the patient's body.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	Then it should be placed on the patient's limb, and the finger should be on the spot we have mentioned, until such time as when we have the cupping glasses and do not want to keep the finger there while vapor rises over that spot, then the cupping glass will soon fall off.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And ignite the cloth according to its method, and repeat that if you need to do so.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	And in the treatment of pleurisy with cupping, it is done using water, which contains neither sediment nor dregs, and it is only filled with this water, and then placed on the limb solely for that purpose.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is its form: And this cupping device, the larger it is, the better, so that it can receive a large quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Capitol .xcvii.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Bloodletting is not administered on many parts of the body but only in those parts where it's not possible to apply cupping, due to their small size, such as the foot and gum and similar areas; or in parts devoid of flesh, such as the finger and nose and their likes.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those leeches that you have found in the waters that are clean from putrefaction.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And then they should be left day and night in clean water until they become hungry, and that no residue remains in their stomachs; then the body should be purged at the beginning with bloodletting and cupping; then rub the patient's limb until it reddens; then place them on it.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are full and fall off.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to draw out the fluid from the area using a cupping device, it is more beneficial for healing.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, then wash the area with vinegar and then with clean water; it should be rubbed and squeezed.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the flow of blood is prolonged at the site of the leeches, and this bleeding continues, then you dip a cloth in cold water, and place it over until the bleeding stops.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the blood is multiplied, then sprinkle over it finely ground vitriol or gall and similar astringent substances until the bleeding stops; or place on the area cloths soaked with boiled beans, leaving them until the beans adhere to the site, at which point the bleeding will cease.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And it is necessary, if required, to perform repeated bloodletting, changing the spots when possible.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if bloodletting is prohibited due to suspension, then rub the area with fresh blood or insert a needle into the spots until blood flows; and then apply [a treatment], for those who feel any blood will soon recover. 
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to fall off, sprinkle a little powdered aloes, or salt, or ashes on them, and they will soon fall off.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begins the chapter of the third part: on restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine; it is about the restoration of fractures and dislocations in the bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, son, know that this chapter is boasted about by foolish doctors and common ones, and those who have not for any time regarded the books of the Ancients nor read a single letter from them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason, this method of the knowledgeable is kept private in our land; and I have not forgotten it at any time, nor altogether; and I did not adopt what follows merely out of long reading of the books of the Ancients or study to understand them, but extracted the knowledge from those sources.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And further, I directed myself to experimentation and study throughout my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described in this chapter everything that my knowledge contains and on which my experience has passed; since I have summarized this for you others and freed it from the burden of length; and I have summarized this at the end of summarizing; and shown this at the end of explanation; and formed several forms of treatments that are administered therein, as is done by adding to the explanation, just as I have done in the two previous chapters.
Capitol primier.	Capitol primier.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissia necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fractorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Covering the introduction of this chapter requires us to state the main points of the discourse; and these chapters force the craftsman at their beginning to stand on the truth of those points; thus, it is for you and those who are quick to know or learn this noble art from you.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore it is said that when you encounter a fracture or dislocation or twist or sprain, then at the beginning you must proceed with flebotomia (bloodletting) or bandaging that area, or both together, unless there is some prohibition, such as weakness of strength, or if the one who has suffered this is an infant, or old and frail, or it is a time of intense heat, or intense cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And then be content with food such as fresh herbs and the meat of birds and crabs; we prohibit heavy meats and overfilling oneself with foods and any food that fills the veins with blood, except when you are certain of a safe abscess cautery, and if you do not fear an effusion of matter into the limb.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to their original regimen with which they were accustomed.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And therefore, as the broken bone begins to heal, then the patient must be fed nutritious foods that are rich and heavy with viscosity, such as foods made from baked wheat with water, rice, beans, fish, cow's stomach, eggs, fresh cheese, thick wine, and similar items. With this regimen, fracture coagulation occurs more easily and better.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And know that broken bones in young men and the elderly cannot be naturally continued and consolidated due to the dryness of their limbs.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are consolidated and continued according to their nature for the entire time due to the drying of those limbs, and thus continue and consolidate those that belong to them at the end of their softness, just as the bones of young children do.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	But nature adjusts and binds over the broken bone from every part a substance similar to glue in which there is thickness that adheres and strengthens that space until they are conglutinated and united together, until the strength and firmness come, just as fire at the beginning, until no cause prevents it from performing its functions.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason, it is necessary to restrict the patient’s food, foods which are heavy, viscous, and thick, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Note the diversity of fractures according to the diversity of the limb.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And know that the types of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the limbs, for a fracture of the thigh bone is different from a fracture of the skull bone; and a fracture of the foot bone is different from a fracture of the back bone; and similarly, all other limbs are different from each other.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I will proceed with the recollection of each type of fracture, explained in its own chapter distinct from the other.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Note the diversity of fractures within the fracture itself.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And here is the translation of the given sentence line by line into English:
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And in every particular case, there is a specific remedy or torment proper for the restoration of it, which will come with distinct recollection in its respective places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Mark the sign of a bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And by this is known a bone fracture: it is the twisting of it, and that prominence and appreciation of it to the touch, and so when you press on it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore, when there is no obvious twisting in place and you do not feel any unusual sensation when you touch the bone with movement and the patient does not find great pain, then it is not a fracture.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It is possible that there may be a slight twist or small crack, in which case you do not need to massage it with your hand and compression all over; instead, apply one of the medicines you remember being effective at that moment to the area; then bind it tightly for subtle constriction.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And know that when the area is curved and not split in two or affected by anything else that does not cause significant damage to the entire part of its structure, then you must begin at once with the correction of it, applying a poultice that helps with inflammation.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if there is inflammation, then leave it for several days until the inflammation subsides; then treat it in whatever way you can with轻柔和巧思。(Note: The last part seems to have been partially translated into Chinese. Assuming continuity in the same language, here's a revised translation attempt)
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And know that the restoration and healing of the flesh is quicker than that of the bone where the injury occurs.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	Then strengthen that second part so that the memory of it returns.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	But if the injury is in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken limb from both ends, whether it is an arm or a leg; or with your hand if the limb is small; or with two ropes or one rope and the hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And you should position the limb in such a way that you place it according to its natural shape, while the broken parts are extended, so that you can skillfully return those additions in whatever manner you can to their proper places.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And be careful according to your strength that you do not cause pain or injury to the patient with your operation; and do your best to align one bone with its companion in their best possible forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And it is necessary that at that moment you skillfully touch with your hand the affected area, and if there is any other cause, correct it and adjust it according to the extent of your ability.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And there is a strong extension and compression, just as some foolish doctors do, who many times cause an abscess to occur through their operation, or cause contraction in the limb, just as we have seen this happen through their many operations.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And then connect, then equalize and conduct a proper operation and constriction of that limb, and provide rest and tranquility; warn the patient about this and make sure they do not move that part during their wakefulness and sleep, and prevent its revolution and agitation, and stop all of its movements with all of its strength; and wait until the position of the limb is one in which pain is assured to be caused by it being in a position where there is discomfort or injury; then it must change to another position where they do not feel pain; and ensure with this that the position of it remains straight and even, so that when restored, no distortion occurs to the limb.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the constriction of the tranquilized limb is what I recommend; so that you know that broken limbs vary in their smallness and greatness and in the form of those. 
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And of those that are small like the arm and the toe and the finger and similar to these, then it is necessary that the wrapping be of very fine cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	And for those that are large like the thigh or the chest, it is necessary that they be wrapped with tight and strong bindings, because the tight binding should secure the large and strong member entirely with equal pressure, in such a way that no impurity enters.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	Then begin, for your evacuation of liquids, to apply an appropriate bandage over the site of that fracture with three or four layers according to what the limb requires; and hold your hand tightly on the bandage.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	Then come to the highest part of the fracture site, and tighten more so that your binding does not loosen with which you have tightened the area of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	Then extend the area of the fracture slightly with wrapping, and gradually loosen the binding little by little until you have loosened a large part of it.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	Then take another bandage and wrap it again over the broken area with layers, and proceed with the layers to the lower part of the fracture; and let your operation in tightening the wrapping and loosening it be as we have said for the first wrapping above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then place between the layers of linen or cloth with which the curvature of the fracture is aligned, if there is curvature in it; and if not, do not place anything in it for any reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then place another bandage over it, and then apply these properly prepared plasters to the areas where there is no inflammation or abscess immediately, and now place on that which treats the abscess and reduces the swelling; and leave that for several days; and then you strengthen it with the plasters.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And let the plasters be made from half of the ladanum resin, and well-formed wisely; or they may be made of pine wood; or of palm leaves; and the size of each plaster should follow this form and this figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, the plaster that is placed over the fracture should be thicker and a bit more ladanum than the other plasters, and the length of the plaster according to what suits the limb in size and smallness; then strengthen over the plasters with another bandage according to your first binding; then cover it above with wax appropriately as we have said about binding, which is that your binding should be tighter near the location of the fracture, and the farther away from the fracture, the looser the binding.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And it is necessary that the threads be moderate in thickness and fineness, and they should be made of linen; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the operations of some false binders using their threads from twisted ropes, this is a great error, for it makes the binding uneven.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And fine threads are not suitable, for you will not achieve what you want with them due to tightness, and it is not necessary that between stitch and stitch there be less than a finger.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is bothered by the ends of the ribs near the constriction in those areas, then place there some wool or felted wool between so that it does not cause harm to them.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	At times a fracture is accompanied by inflammation, and there occurs disruption in the chain, which will be remembered in that context in the second chapter under singularity.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And know that in all fractured limbs, it is not immediately set with splints on the first day; this is because when the limb is large, it should not be placed upon the splints right away but rather after five or six days, or even more, according to your assurance of the occurrence of abscess healing.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the method of plasters with which the Ancients would treat fractures, dislocations, and twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Method of making a plaster for the restoration of fractures, suitable for various complications and especially for women and children, as it does not generate heat or irritation: take flour powder, which is the residue of wheat bran that sticks to the millstone walls during grinding.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And prepare it thus: sieve it with egg white, and make the mixture neither too thick nor too thin; then use it accordingly.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method of plaster for treating fractures, dislocations, and twists: take assafetida, ladanum, acacia, enula, and migrach, which is the resin of wild millet, all one drachm each; myrrh and aloes wood, one drachm each; and alcohol, two drachms. All should be crushed, sieved, and mixed with alcoholic water or egg white if the patient's condition is inflamed; then use this plaster, as it has a good composition that easily restores broken bones and provides support to many people.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another method for making a poultice that you apply to fractures and twists: take myrrh and add white elder, each half a drachm x; of frankincense and aloeswood each half a drachm v; of acacia half a drachm vi; of Armenian bole half a drachm xx.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All are ground in a mortar with fine grinding, and they are sieved, and they are made into a paste with water or egg white and is administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Method of treating dislocated joints and bones that have separated from their places, as well as pain occurring in those areas and at fractures and breaks: take clean wool and soak it in sweet wine and boiled oil, then place it over the area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	But in this plaster there is no virtue of restoration, it burns and expels pain properly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method for a plaster that restores fractures: take leaves of wild fig and leaves of wild poppy; mix them all together and make a plaster from them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Method for a short plaster to administer restoration of bone fractures and when you want resolution of remaining swelling: take roots of marshmallow, chamomile, and violet flowers, flour of bran, all in equal parts; grind them all and mix them with wine, if the limb is not inflamed.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	But if it is inflamed, then soothe it with coriander water or with water and oil of it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method for a plaster that is stronger in resolution than the first one, when you need to resolve hard swelling and restore the limb: take roots of marshmallow and seeds of it, hawthorn, melilot, marjoram, violet flowers, chamomile flowers, all in equal parts; grind them all together and mix them with sage water or sweet water or wine, whichever suits the nature of the limb and the condition of its color.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	More in Gaul it is seen that they are placed upon the fractured limb for its restoration and the causes which involve drying with little heat such as myrrh, incense, and similar to those causes we have mentioned.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Method of plaster that comforts injury and pain: take egg white, cheese, human hair cut up or bird feather, alum, and salt, in equal parts; they should be crushed and sieved and then mixed together, and a plaster is made.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	More on the quantity according to which the bandage should remain and then be loosened is that you consider whether it is not an accidental pain or a puncture wound nor if the bone is broken and has not moved from its place, then you do not loosen for many days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if you encounter a place with severe pain or redness or swelling, then you should treat it immediately at that hour, and remove the plaster from it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take cloth and sea sponge soaked in water, and submerge that in tepid water, and wash the area until the redness fades and the pain is soothed; then let the limb rest for an hour; then place on it wool soaked in sweet wine and oil or ointment, and apply that over it for a night until you are sure there is no risk of abscess, and that the swelling of the limb subsides, and the pain is alleviated.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then apply that gentle binding and small plaster without making it as tight as your first constraint, and continue to do so gently until it is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if you find that the abscess and the heat and the pain and the swelling and all the symptoms have been completely alleviated, and there is no longer a need for plaster and binding, then you should repeat the process as you did at the beginning in the same manner.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if you do not encounter any of those causes we have mentioned in the limb, then do not release it until three or four or five or seven days later; and sometimes this is left for twenty days according to what appears best to you regarding the releasing of the limb, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and approaches the coagulation of the flesh over it.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And now adjust in the constriction more than in your initial constriction altogether, and adjust to the swelling of the food (likely referring to the body or flesh) of the patient according to how it is preceded by the memory of it.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	More if you see the location of the fracture already dry and shriveled more than it should be, then know that nourishment is prohibited from reaching there; and therefore moisten that area with lukewarm water repeatedly as you cleanse it; and let this happen for all three days; and ease the constriction a little, and by this operation allow nutrition to reach the limb, and it will heal lightly.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	However, what those inexperienced restorers of a fractured limb do otherwise when it is not restored properly at the beginning, and is restored with deformity, is an error according to their operation, causing great concern; if this were corrected, the Ancients would have expanded on this in their books and acted accordingly.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen any of them do this, which is why it is more reasonable that this should not be done.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Second chapter: On fractures when they occur in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The types of fractures are many, and their forms are diverse, and the causes are distinct. For some fractures are caused by the impact of a club, and this impact pushes all the bone inside the skull, which remains as the bone does, just as this happens to a tree trunk; thus, this type is named ascial. Or the club incises some part of the bone and cuts into the flesh but does not pass through to the back side of it; and this species of fracture is called levatio absoluta.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the severity of these two fractures is either great or slight, and it refers to a fracture that is comminuted or impacted; and the cause of this is a blow with a heavy object or falling onto stone, and such are their similarities.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture either is penetrating and already approaches the periosteum which is beneath the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone, and the severity of these two fractures can be great or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And for a fracture, it is displaced in the bone, in the fine hair-like detail, and thus this type of fracture is named capillary.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And it is a fracture that can be caused either by falling or by the impact of a stone and similar objects, which causes some piece of the bone to enter into the inner parts, and occurs in the concave area, just as it happens with the tiles on a roof when they are struck, causing them to break inward.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And this is more commonly caused in the softer bones of humans, such as the heads of infants.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And thus, for all these types of fractures, they are pieces, like separate shards.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And I will return to this topic in detail at the appropriate place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And know all these types of fractures by detection on them and by probing their edges and the presence of corrupted flesh that is over them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And the capillary type is known by what is discovered on the bone, which is cleaned and wiped with a cloth, for the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	However, in the treatment of fractures, consider at the beginning the symptoms of the patient, and if you see by the symptoms that they indicate clear signs of fear, such as vomiting due to anger, and extension, and loss of understanding, and loss of voice, and fainting, and acute fever, and secretion from the wounds and heat of those, and similar symptoms in the most severe conditions, then it is understood that there will be no healing.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you expect uncommon accidents to be healed, then you begin the treatment of him.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	Which cause is that if the injured person comes to you at the beginning of winter when they are injured, then you must study the setting of the bone before the fourteenth day according to all dispositions.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is during the days of summer, then you must be careful to set the bone before the seventh day, because what remains under the bone may be corrupted by pus, and accidents that we have mentioned may occur.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the pus covering the brain and is broken into small fragmented and abrasive pieces, then you must incise the fragmented and abrasive parts, as I will recommend to you. 
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And you shave the head of the afflicted patient, and expose the bone according to custom and method as much as possible based on the shape of the affliction, so that it is light on the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if you happen to need the detection of bone damage, blood flow or a hot abscess, then you should act according to what is necessary, which is that you fill the area with cloths soaked in wine and oiled with rose oil, and let the wound rest until the abscess is calmed and ensure the cessation of blood flow; then begin with the circumvention of the bone and its removal.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this should be done in one of two ways of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And one way is that you incise the bone with a straight cutting instrument, and this is its form: And then administer another incising tool like this one, a bit more to the side than the previous one; and this is its form: 
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then administer more of the incision to the side than the second [incision].
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And it is necessary that you have a variety of incisors, some broader than others; and some are shorter than the others and sharp at the ends of their extremities, and they should be made of Indian iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them with ease in percussion over the incisions so that the head does not move and lead it thus.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and hard, then you must perforate around it before administering the incisors with the drills, which are called non-penetrating drills.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are not named thus unless those do not stop the end of the bone of the testicle near it, so that on the troublesome area there is a rounded extremity or margin above which is left sharp like a margin or a small circle, which you must prevent from being submerged and penetrating beyond the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take of these probes a great number, each of which should be suited to the sharpness needed for each bone, among them being present in all tests of the brain an end which is sharp, the quantity in length and brevity according to the degree of sharpness needed for this test.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the form of three types of splints: The quality of piercing around the broken bone is to place the splint on the bone and rotate it with your hands until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then change the splint to another location, placing it so that the width between all turns equals the thickness of a rib or about that.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	Then cut with scissors between each segment of the bone, and make that pus as subtle as you can on top of it at the end of the incision, just as we have said, until you remove the bone, either by hand or by some other means which you will have prepared for this purpose, such as forceps and fine tweezers.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And you must be careful that the scissors do not touch any part of the spine.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And thus, once you have pierced around the bone, and it will be separated from the spine if it is connected to it, and you have extracted it, you must scrape and smooth it on its roughness with a tool similar to scissors, but it should be thinner and finer than other scissors.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if any small and fragmented parts of the bones remain, then take those away easily with what you should use from the instruments; and then treat the wound with lint and ointments as we have mentioned.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And another method of operation is lighter and farther from danger, which you call Gaulish and heal by great heat; this is what it means: at the beginning, you must start to uncover the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most violent and evident. Once you have uncovered that part, place there the extremity of this gentle and slow instrument, whose form is as follows:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And it is that the lens-shaped fracture is lion-like and does not divide any cause, and the acute fracture splits it into two parts in lengthwise, just as happens; so the lens-shaped fracture should be aligned with the vertebra with its sharp edge facing towards the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then strike upon the incision point of a part with a small hammer so that you cut through the entire bone easily as it turns, and be certain about the flap of tissue to prevent any accident in any way, and even if the medic were the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant among them; certainly, and if he were sleeping.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	When any cause attached to the bone of the panniculus occurs in certain places of the bone, cut away that part from it with the pointed end of a lenticular incisor, and remove it easily from it, for it is removed without harm and without fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the subcutaneous tissue, and what is cut off or remains of the bone is its surface, and roughness and fine splinters remain in it, then you must scrape away that roughness and remove those splinters with fine razors which you have prepared in various sizes so that you can apply them in the most appropriate places for their use and in the straightest manner according to how much you need to repair your operation on that broken bone and its shape.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And you must apply with your reason at the beginning the least sharp of those razors, and then use progressively the finer ones, and do not stop doing this continuously until you administer the sharpest and the finest of all those. 
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	And in each of the other small capillary fractures and subtle fractures, you must administer treatment according to what is needed for the correction of it.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is the case that not everyone who has studied in that field is fully proficient or expert at it.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And we have demonstrated this on what we have written about large fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the tissue is removed when you extract the bone, then you must take cloth according to the size of the wound, and submerge it in oiled rose oil, and place it over the opening of the wound; then take another folded or tripled cloth and submerge it in wine and oiled rose oil, and place it over the first cloth, and apply this as lightly as you can on top of it so that you do not aggravate the site; then administer a liniment over it, and wrap it only to the extent that fits the size of the wound.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And leave it with this treatment for one or two days until you are sure of a safe abscess; then remove the bandage and apply medicines that have excessive drying properties, such as lint ashes and flour of ferns, and powders of snails and aristolochia, and similar substances.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And it is that you make these medicines into a powder which should be sprinkled on the wound when they are dry; and generally, administer all medicine with properties such that it cleanses and does not irritate.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And be careful according to your skill that the wound in your treatment is clean; and do not let it become clogged with pus or anything else; nor allow any virulence to accumulate in it; for when it adheres to the membrane of the brain, it corrupts that and weakens it, and you will cause this malicious evil to happen to the patient.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And it affects the skull, altering the bone, especially when the treatment is neglected, and there is blackening on its surface; therefore, consider if any of the accidents we have mentioned occur to the patient, you should know that it is harmful in every way.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if there is no blackening except from the medicine that is applied to it, and it is due to the power of that medicine which causes the blackening, then you should take one part of honey and three parts of anointed oil, and with those, soak a cloth, and then apply that over the skull; and then treat it with healing spices until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Capitol .iii.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	For the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that the nose is not broken into more than two main parts, or one of those may be cartilaginous, because there are two bones in it, and the part that is cartilaginous does not break; thus, you only encounter friction, tortuosity, and sinuosity.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	If one of the two parts of the nose is broken, then you must insert your little finger into the inside of the nostril and adjust that fracture with your index finger from the inside, while using your thumb from the outside, until the nose returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And this should be done gently by you, and take care not to cause additional pain to the patient through your operation.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose where your finger cannot reach, then it should be adjusted using the tip of an instrument that has a small thickness.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then you should treat it accordingly. 
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And treat with restoration of the limb on the first day of the fracture if possible; and if not, then around the seventh or tenth day, you should address the swelling by cauterization.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And then insert into the end of the nose a strip of linen cloth if the fracture is in one piece, or put two splints if the fracture is in two pieces, and let the thickness of the splint be such that it fills the gap of the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And some of the ancient restorers say that the splints should be inserted into leather, and changed throughout the day, but I do not see it this way; rather, the strip should be wrapped in chicken egg white mixed with powdered meal; then leave the splint in place until the bone is set and the cartilage has hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And sometimes a splint should be inserted into the nose, instead of using a wooden peg wrapped in linen cloth; this is especially for when the nasal fracture is severe and to ensure that the patient's breathing is not restricted.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this method is not necessarily required; if you wish, do this, and if you prefer, use splints.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if swelling occurs again, apply a poultice to the nose with wax or fat mixed with sweet wine and rose oil, or use diaquilon.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	Here is the translation of the given line:
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	If the nasal bones are broken with a small fracture or comminuted, then you must incise over them and extract the fragments using appropriate instruments; then close the wound and treat it with something that promotes healing and consolidation, and with plasters suitable for this purpose.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if an inflammation occurs inside the nose, then you must treat it with warm compresses and administer lead tubes until it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter IV.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the restoration of the jaw when it is fractured.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not inflamed, then observe if the fracture is only on the outer side and not split into two parts nor bent inward; in this case, the treatment is simple.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, you should insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth; and similarly, if the fracture is on the left jaw, then insert the right index finger; and with that, push the soft tissue of the fracture inward easily to the outer parts, using your other hand on the outer part of the bone; in this way, you properly align it.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, then it is necessary to administer extension from both sides according to straightness until it is possible to align it.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if you encounter the displacement of teeth to disruption, then secure those that you hope will remain with a thread of gold or silver or wax; and then place cerot over the broken jaw, and then place a doubled cloth over it, and place a properly made large splint or a piece of sole leather equal in length to the jaw over the cloth; and then bind it according to how your bandaging is prepared and where you deem application appropriate until it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to use rest and tranquility, and place their food in sipped broths.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you suspect that the shape has already been altered in any way, then on the third day you should be cautious and unbind it; and then correct what has already been altered in it by applying a plaster made with ground meal, egg white, or sesame flour, after you have removed the cerot from it, and place wool over the plaster.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then when that plaster is applied and positioned properly, and the arrangement of the bone is not altered, leave it like that without loosening it until it is healed and the fracture has strengthened; because this kind of fracture often takes about three weeks to tighten.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if an abscess occurs again, then administer what we have said multiple times in the sedation of the patient until it is healed, and let that abscess be drained.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is accompanied by a wound, then consider whether it is a piece of bone that has separated or splinters; therefore, you must carefully remove those splinters using what is appropriate for the removal of such debris.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the opening of the wound is narrow, then you should enlarge it with trepanation according to the extent of your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And then when you have removed those splinters, and no residue is left to be drained, sew up the opening of the wound if it is large; and if not, apply one of the plasters suitable for this purpose over it and promote healing until it is healed.
Capitol .v.	Capitol .v.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	For the translation of the given line from this medieval medical treatise:
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	Here is the translation line by line:
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation in that case, when the fracture is severely bent, is for you to have two assistants present, so that one holds the splint and follows the broken fork, and the other extends the arm to that part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And then align the fracture with your fingers into the shape that is necessary, and it should not be on a slight prominence or concavity.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you need more extension, then you must place under the limb of the patient a pad of cloth or wool, and its size should be according to your need; extend and lift the fork and compress the pad with your hand until you align the fracture as necessary.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot bring the end of the fork to the outer parts because it has reached the elbow, then the patient must be laid on their back, and place a cushion of moderate size over the muscle.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the assistant should press on the muscle below to elevate the bone of the fork at the elbow upwards, and then you should correct the fracture and align it with your fingers.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	But if you feel splinters from the fork and they are causing harm, then you must cut over them and remove those splinters easily.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is retained in the bone, then you devise an incision on it with one of the incisors that you have prepared for this, since you had placed under it the forked instrument which serves as a clamp; and this instrument is made of wood or iron and has the following form:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it is similar to a spoon, of which this is the concavity; and its width should be according to what you need from it, depending on the size of the bone or the smallness of it.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	And let the length of it be as much as is possible for you during the operation; that it have two ends like you see, and one end be wide and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the wound that you have incised when you have extracted the splinter from the bone is wide, and there is a risk of abscess formation, then you should approximate the two edges of the wound with sutures.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is small, or you fear abscess formation, then you should fill the wound with dressings and poultices according to the extent of the wound's裂口。请注意，最后一部分“scissura della plagua”更准确地翻译应为“伤口的裂开部分”，因此完整的翻译可以是：
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if a hot abscess occurs, then soak cloth in sweet wine and rose oil and wine, and place it over that area.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	When the bone is swollen and its section needs treatment due to a fracture, you should apply a plaster made of ground flour with egg white, and place it over the broken area. Then, if necessary, add titillation (a type of massage or stimulation), and then take an herbal poultice which is rolled up and about one palm wide; place doubled-up pillows on top of the fracture and the plaster. Next, take a thin wooden splint that is three fingers wide and similarly long in length. Wrap this splint with cloth, and wrap this cloth-covered splint over the fractured area. Then apply an herbal poultice as mentioned before, covering it around the neck (metaphorically referring to the main part of the bone) and providing titillation, placing it on both sides and all parts. This will ensure that the fracture is properly aligned without any concealment or misalignment.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And thus, the bandage should not be too tight over the broken bone; therefore, you must see the patient every day, so that when the binding is softened or you notice the bandage is already loose, then you correct this and strengthen the wrapping.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	Then place the shoulder of the patient on a pillow, and put under it another small cushion so that when he sleeps at night, his shoulder is slightly elevated; thus the support from one side is raised, and therefore the clavicle fracture is elevated along with the muscle; or his arm is tied to the shoulder in this manner.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not loosen the bandage unless you find suppuration or an abscess in the area within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	Then renew the plaster if you have seen its surface like this, and apply it to the constriction, restore it, and leave it until the clavicle fracture is restored and coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and healed according to the same in twenty-eight days, and sometimes in some men, it happens in less time than that.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	On the restoration of a shoulder fracture.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The shoulder blade is fractured on the side and not broken through, but only at the edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And so when the place is broken — and it is broken in the middle of it — and it is not known except by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture force it into its preparation and reduce it according to its natural form in every way you can manage with your ingenuity.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	Then apply powdered mallow mixed with egg white and lion's styptic over the area; then place a layer of folded cloth on it; then put a thin linen cloth over it, according to the quantity of the whole or almost the entire spatula.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	But if the linen cloth leaves a depression in some parts of the spatula, then fill that depression with lion's styptic, and then raise the linen cloth to an even level.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	Then strengthen it with a long-lasting poultice and apply moderate constriction, securing the linen in place so that it does not move from its position.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And examine the bandage every day; whenever it becomes loosened, bind it again and tighten it, and reposition the linen if it has moved from its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And lay the patient on his side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the spatula is restored in twenty days or in twenty-five.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And therefore when this number is completed, then you dissolve the binding, and you must be sure which of those are bones whose beginning is not feared nor their dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you process the area of the broken bone and place the splint there, then you cut over it, remove it, and proceed as we have said in the fracture of the clavicle. If an abscess occurs here, apply a cautery.
Capitol .vii.	Capitol .vii.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	For the restoration of the fracture of the foot.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot sometimes breaks in the middle and heals slowly; however, the ends of it move and heal together.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And of the accidents when the middle part is broken is that it declines into internal parts and causes great pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, strong wind, and vomiting blood; and it is declared in the cavity where the bone is broken and not hidden from sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of him is that the patient should be laid on his back, and place a cushion between his shoulders; then press his muscles, adjust his ribs with both hands, and be subtle in the operation and in the setting according to every manner that is possible for it and suitable for it, until the bone returns to its proper shape.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	Then place a plaster and tow on him, and put a thin cloth or calico and something similar in lightness over that, as you wrap it in fabric; then be careful to bind the broken bone so that it does not shift; and wind with bandages according to the roundness of the back several times, and secure that firmly but gently; then check the bandage at all times, and when it is softened, tighten it.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if necessity causes the loosening of that due to corrosion or pricking, or pain, or inflammation that might occur in the area, then you should treat and unbind it, remove the plaster, and correct what happened by means of treatment; then reapply the plaster if it needs to be done; and adjust the binding until it is healed.
Capitol .viii.	Capitol .viii.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	For the restoration of the ribs when they are broken.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Know that a fracture of the ribs does not occur except in thick places along the back; and at the ends of them, in front, it does not happen to those areas except because they are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And the knowledge of it is not hidden from the senses; you should investigate it with the fingers.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration should be such that you align the fracture with your fingers in the most possible way, until it is properly aligned as needed, and then apply and secure the broken bone with a splint if necessary.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the ribs is leaning inward, then the patient will experience severe pain and puncturing sensations, much like the piercing that occurs in pleurisy, because the bone is pressing on the membrane; and it leads to difficulty breathing, coughing, and vomiting blood; and this condition is difficult to cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And the Ancients were ingenious in that they used many inventive methods.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And regarding this, it is said: one must prevent the patient from consuming foods that cause inflammation and gas, so that the stomach does not become inflated and extended, which would push the fracture outward.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	And let us avoid that, so as not to cause an insignificant reason for generating a carbuncle from the cautery, if it does not happen accidentally; and if it does happen, then it already aids in this.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And some of them said that a cupping glass should be placed on it and then sucked with strength; this seems like reasoning, but nevertheless, it is feared that the cupping glass might draw the excesses to the site due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And some of them said: the area must be covered with wool that has already been soaked in cauterizing oil, and pillows should be placed between the ribs until it is filled, so that the binding is like when you wrap around that second roundness; then the patient should be treated with a cure for pleurisy using food and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if the severe constraint causes great suffering to the patient which cannot be endured, and the bone punctures the membrane with a tear, fear for the patient, then it is necessary to incise over that area, expose the broken rib, and then place an instrument over it that holds the spine in position, remembering which one precedes, and cut the bone easily, and extract it.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And then we join the two edges of the wound together with stitches, if it is large, and treat it with plasters until it heals.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if an abscess occurs inside, then you should soak pillows in oiled rose and place them over the area, and treat the patient with what is appropriate for an internal abscess.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And let him lie on his side on which he sleeps until he is healed.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the restoration of fractures of the spine and the neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Sometimes fractures occur in the bones of the neck, and similarly to their articulations, and likewise in the vertebrae of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then consider: if their hands are already softened, stupefied, and numb, and they cannot move them, extend them, or grasp with them, and when you press on them with your fingers or pierce them with a needle and they feel no pain in them, then you know that they will not be healed, and in the days of such conditions, it is fatal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if you feel a constriction and pressure in those areas with the fingers and pricking, then you know that the bone marrow is safe and that you will cure the patient with treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see a similar condition in the vertebrae of the neck and want to know if it will heal or not, then consider the feet of the patient.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	And if you see that they are already softened, apply to them what is applied to the muscles, and then when he lies on his back, he experiences windiness and involuntary excretion, and sometimes rolls onto his back and wants to urinate but cannot, then you know it is mortal, and therefore do not labor in his treatment.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	But if none of those causes apply, the cause is better and less severe.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the treatment is to perform the reduction of the abscess by placing over the affected vertebra oil or resin, or a poultice of boiled eggs; place that over it several times a day until the abscess is reduced.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And now apply one of the comforting and stimulating plasters, and secure it with a bandage; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility and not to sleep on the painful area until healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if you happen to scrape off the marrow of the bone or for some reason it is already separated from it, then you must dry out the wound and remove that bone; then approximate the two edges of the wound, sewing them together if the wound is large; then treat it with some flesh-growing ointment until it heals.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	And if the rear part of the bone in the buttocks is fractured, which is the end of the hip bone, then you must insert the index finger of your left hand into the anus and align the broken bone with your other hand as much as possible according to second-degree equilibrium; then place a plaster and splint over it if needed, and secure it firmly.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel that the sinews are broken inside, then you should incise over that area, remove it, and treat the wound with the previously mentioned treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De restauracio de la ancha.	On the restoration of the anus.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones around the anus are sometimes fractured, and when they are, the fracture is usually a communication at their extremities, running lengthwise and sloping inward. The patient will feel pain and stabbing sensations in that area, and the abdomen may become numb when fractured.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over that area which is above the fracture, which is the shape of it.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is only at the extremity of it (the limb), then you align that as you are accustomed by setting it in such a way that it resembles its natural form.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	And if the fracture is in the spine or declines towards the lower parts, then you make the patient lie on their stomach while you prepare the treatment for that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And so, when you have aligned that, place a plaster over it, then place a splint of wood or a bandage over it, and secure it tightly in such a way that you do not fear any penetration of the fracture or displacement of the splint.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And align the concavity by filling it in such a way that it tightens according to equality, and instruct the patient to sleep on their back or on their side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	And if an inflammatory swelling occurs, then you cease the extension and treatment of it until the swelling is reduced, and apply something to reduce that swelling as previously indicated; then return to its treatment and secure it accordingly.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if it happens that the bones are shattered or broken, then you treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	For the restoration of the fracture of the auxiliary [bone or limb].
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	Helper is that which is between the thigh and the head of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, then the restoration of it can be done in one of two ways, one of which is that you take a flat splint according to this thickness:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And let there be two ligaments at the two ends, and then let it be suspended from an elevated place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And place the patient on a seat; then extend their broken arm over the splint so that it reaches the tip of it at the middle point where the curvature of the splint is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And then suspend some heavy weight over it, or the servant should extend it to the sides; and then the doctor should align the fracture with their hands together until the fracture returns to its proper position.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other method is that the patient should be laid on their back and suspend the arm of the collar with a ligament; then command two servants, one of whom holds above the fracture with their hands, and the other holds below it; each extends to their respective side.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then you pull on the fracture with one bandage and on that [fracture] with another bandage, and each of the two assistants should pull at their respective ends.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And therefore, if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, then it must be placed with half of the ligament over the tendon and the other half under the fracture by the knee.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And similarly, if the fracture is near the hip, then it must be bandaged over that area and over that hip.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Equalize that with ease and its operation, and then when it is equalized according to what is needed and applied properly, then strengthen that if suppuration does not occur by cauterization.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	If you encounter an abscess that needs cauterization, then leave the binding in place until the seventh day, and place over it wool soaked in vinegar and rose oil until the abscess rests, and then you can remove that.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the method to treat that is to place a plaster over the fracture, and then wrap a piece of clean cloth around the plaster; and then adjust the arm on that support, and place your open hand over their muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And place the cloth and bind it tightly around the arm to keep the arm in a fixed position, unless there is any reason due to a broken bone that prohibits this.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And now use the plasters.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And it is that you place over the fracture that plank which is more side by side and stronger than the other planks; and leave between each plank the width of a finger, and let the length of the planks be according to the break with an addition of three fingers on all sides.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	Then strengthen over the planks with the binding that I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And it is that your binding over the site of the fracture should be tighter.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the fracture is more extended, the binding should be looser.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And thus you change the position of the planks and the binding as we have said at the time when you restore the limb to its proper position, then you do so.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear an abscess may form, then you loosen the binding and the planks until the seventh day as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	Then examine the limb in all parts for three days so that no pus or inflammation occurs at the site; and it is prohibited for food to reach the limb due to the excess of binding; therefore, correct everything according to what we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	But if you are confident that there is no cause for this, then do not remove the bandage until three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the patient's sleep be on their back, and their hands should be on their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place a warm pad filled with wool on the splint, and ensure at any time of night or day that the shape of the broken limb is not loosened or dissolved, or that the binding becomes loose; therefore, correct this entirely with your skill.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And give food to the patient according to the order we mentioned before, so that the food is light at the beginning until it starts to strengthen; and then you must gradually make the food more substantial for them.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	For it is customary for the splint and the bandage to be tight for forty days; and then they must be loosened, and a bath should be administered and treated with ointments that correct that condition.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is a comminuted one, then you should not remove the binding and the splints until forty days or up to two months.
Capitol .xii.	Capitol .xii.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	For the restoration of a fractured arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones which are called the radius and ulna; of which one is small, and it is that which forms the said wrist, and the other is large and is the one placed below the small one, from the lower part.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And often only the larger bone is broken, or the smaller one, and often both are broken together.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the smaller bone above is broken, then its restoration is easy, and its healing is even easier.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the bone is broken below, then the fracture is bad, and its healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And worse than that is when two bones are broken together.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the broken bone is the smaller bone above, then it is appropriate for the doctor to restore it with slight extension easily until it is aligned properly.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the larger bone is the one that is broken, then it is necessary to apply more forceful extension.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both bones are broken together, then you must apply even stronger traction.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And you must place your hand in the proper position for its restoration with extended traction over a cushion, and let the thumb of the hand be at the upper parts more than all other fingers, and the little finger should be lower than the others, and the patient should lie on a lowered chair. 
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And place a cushion in front of him at his height or straight ahead, so that the patient does not lean forward.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	Then the minister extends the arm of the patient using his hand or with bandages, and another minister extends it similarly. 
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And then the doctor should align the bone as he replaces it in the best possible position.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if there is any doubt in setting the bone, then you must carefully return each piece to its proper place with your skill.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if it appears separately that the joint is dislocated and there is no hope for its restoration, then you should act on it and treat it according to the method we have described above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	But if the fracture is due to an infection, I have already dedicated a separate chapter to this, and thus you should follow the treatment outlined there.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you should spread a cloth with a salve made from oiled olive oil and white wax, which is mixed between thick and subtle, and tightly bind a strong cloth over it until the abscess discharges; then remove the salve and apply a poultice prepared from ground powder and egg whites, and then bandage it; and let the bandage that is placed over the fracture be softer and looser.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And know that the number of splints on the arm is seen in major settings, or rather a fracture in one piece or in two pieces together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And then apply your binding strongly and forcefully over the site of the fracture, and when the binding extends further up from the fracture or down below it, adjust the tightness slightly more loosely according to how it was remembered at the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moist, and not hard or rough, and the thread with which it is bound should be of a proper medium between fine and thick, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And examine the limb and the joint after a few days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if any cause occurs that requires correction, such as a swelling that appears on the limb, and now it is necessary to soak the limb in warm water until that swelling subsides.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And leave the limb unconstrained until it rests, and then apply the binding again.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the binding has already been softened and the bone has healed and appears to be in place, now correct everything with your skill.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider whether the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member due to an excess of constriction, for then you must soften that area slightly and leave it for several days so that the nourishment can flow back into it, and then strengthen it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	And if none of the causes that we have mentioned affect the patient, then it is not necessary to loosen anything within about twenty days or thereabouts.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	Then the patient's arm should be suspended by its ability for agitated motion, and make the patient sleep on their back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or in thirty-two days, or it is often restored in twenty-eight days, and all of this depends on the condition of the tissues and the properties of the healing power.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On the restoration of fractures of the wrist and fingers.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Know that the wrist of the hand and the knuckles of the fingers can also fracture, and this usually happens due to sudden impacts.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when you encounter a hand fracture or break, then it is necessary that the patient remains seated and in front of them place weights according to equality, and then place their hand on that which is extended.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And then the minister extends the broken bones and the doctor aligns those that need to be joined with proper alignment. 
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And now it is necessary to place a plaster and wadding, if you do not want an abscess to form from the cautery; then put a cloth over it according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped that in a piece of cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	And if the break is inside the palm of the abdomen, then make a ball out of cloth, and instruct the patient to hold that with their broken palm; then bind it with long cloth. 
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And let the wound be wrapped with cloth in which it is lifted, so that the body part is applied to the palm; and press it as necessary.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	And if the fracture is on the outer part of the limb, then you must place a splint over it and another splint under the fractured area, holding them in your palm so that your hand remains open and straight; and then apply the bandage, just as you turn the hand towards the wrist between the fingers with ligaments.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if you encounter a fracture in one of the fingers, then it should be adjusted as needed and then stabilized with the palm. If you wish, place a small straight splint to elevate the fracture and prevent it from sinking in.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	And if the fracture is in other fingers, such as in the middle finger, or in the index finger, or in the thumb, or in the ring finger, then it should be splinted and bandaged with the finger that is next to it; or all can be bandaged together in a continuous manner, which is better; or place a small splint on that area, just as we have said for the foot.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your treatment, and also that of the inflammation caused by a burn or an opposing condition—through your operation—the appropriate actions when any cause of these occurs, as is repeatedly narrated.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter XIV.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	On the treatment of fractures of the thigh bone.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bone of the thigh is often fractured and can be detected by sensation, as it turns to the side in front and to the most superior position.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the treatment of it is done in such a way that a bandage is tightened over the fracture and another bandage is placed below the fracture, and the patient is laid face down on their stomach.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And then the minister extends the entire limb to its original position according to its nature, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	And if it is applied at the root of the thigh, then the limb should be placed downward to the area near the pubis, so that the extension can go inward, and the other limb leaves the fracture. 
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And similarly, if the fracture is near the neck, then the bandage should be applied near the neck, and the extension should be made to the parts below it.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	Then the doctor equalizes the bone with both of his hands so that it is reduced according to its natural resemblance and the bone is joined by a good union; at this point, it is necessary to apply a plaster and binding, unless swelling occurs in the limb.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	And if swelling does occur, then you should leave it for several days until the swelling subsides, and then return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The binding should be done as follows: you must wrap a hard bandage around the fracture, fold it two or three times, and remove any excess; then wrap the limb until you reach the ankle and the root of the thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert a long band between the thigh and the limb near the neck and downward towards the parts below, so that the ends of the band come from the higher part of the two sides; then wrap what is excess of the band around the limb and the thigh.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And then place your hand over the thigh at the site of that fracture, and put a splint on the bone of the leg.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill the spaces between the leg and the thigh with soft cloths, so that the swelling may be reduced.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then begin with strong bandaging over the middle of the fracture site with three or four layers, and as you move away from the fracture site, make your bandaging looser and lighter and softer.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And then extend the two ends of the splint to the areas between where it reaches the ankle of the foot, and tighten both ends of the splints on the other side so that the bandage does not move from its position.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then apply the bandage in such a way that it does not cause any corrosion, abscesses, swelling, or similar issues to the limb; and if any of these conditions occur, then loosen the bandage, and correct whatever has happened as soon as possible, according to what we have said many times.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And sometimes this thigh fracture is treated by aligning it with splints, just as we have said for the shoulder and arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	However, in the restoration of him in such a manner made, do not cause the patient lameness; and if it is restored alone, besides that which should be applied to the other side, then it is necessary that the one whose side has been treated must limp.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And know that the thigh is strong in forty days or a little more or a little less, and all of this depends on the diversity of the constitutions and of the other conditions.
Capitol .xv.	Capitol .xv.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	For the restoration of the fracture of the kneecap.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Know that dislocation of the kneecap can occur suddenly, but often happens due to repeated wear and tear.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	And if you encounter a fracture, then it is not just a crack or break in its parts, and this can be with one wound or several wounds, and all of this has been determined by the examination.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of it is such that what is broken of its parts should be aligned with those between which something is added and joined as much as possible by equalization, facilitation, and construction.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And then apply a plaster and place it on that round area if you need to; and bind it tightly with an appropriate bandage.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And then consider all the treatments that we have recommended in other fractures, such as cauterizing abscesses and similar procedures to those which should be applied to any accident with what is appropriate for them until they are healed.
Capitol .xvi.	It appears that you've provided a section marker or chapter title, "Capitul .xvi.", which translates to "Chapter XVI" in English. This suggests the beginning of Chapter Sixteen in a text, likely continuing from where the previous translation left off. If you have specific content from this chapter that needs translation or interpretation, feel free to provide it!
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On the restoration of the fracture of the thigh.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Know that in the chest there are two bones of which one is thick and it is named after the name of the chest; and the other is slender and is called a rib.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And in some cases of fractures, what happens to the two bones of the arm also occurs, and by this, the restoration of it is made in the same way as the restoration of the arm equally, and its operation is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if two bones are broken together, the chest is affected in all directions. 
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the bone is fractured more subtly, the chest is turned toward the parts in front.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the largest bone is broken, you find that out, and it is one of those causes that are not within your control.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And then administer extension, equalization, and ligature of the bandages according to that alignment.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, if the fracture of the thigh is slight and has small fragments, the extension should be less and lighter, and you should alleviate it with your strength.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the thigh, there is sometimes a reason for an operation on the arm, which involves aligning the fragments and completing your entire procedure. At this time, you will take pieces of pine wood that are placed under the causes which are positioned on supports, and they are made essentially from palm branches; choose those with small thicknesses, not too thick, and their length should be according to the length of the thigh, and from the knee up to the point below. 
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then wrap each limb in two layers of cloth according to its length, and place one layer under the armpit on one side and the other on the opposite side, and let them remain in the lowest part of the foot. 
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And then place the two straps at three points of both extremities and at the middle point, because with this structure the chest is prevented from tilting to the right or left side, and remains in good position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And already a wooden board according to the length of the chest has been administered; and it is placed on the patient's chest to prevent any movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And it is especially important that you do this in a fracture, and when it is properly diagnosed as such.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then consider every day the chest and study it with previous knowledge, and you guard against abscesses and inflammation or other similar causes; and when any of those causes occur, then apply what is necessary until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	On the fracture of the ankle and the bones of the foot and the toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	A complete fracture does not occur at the ankle; however, fractures do occasionally occur in the bones of the foot; and fractures rarely occur in the toes, and they only happen due to trauma during periods of predisposition.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the foot do fracture and sometimes those bones become displaced from their positions, then the patient should place their foot on the ground as prepared for walking.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Then place one foot over the area where the bones are elevated, and then press and push those bones until they return to their proper positions.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And then apply a plaster and lint over it, and place under the foot's belly a small board to which two heads of cloths are attached.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And then strengthen that with the foot using appropriate binding, since you have wrapped that with cloths and other materials of which you require.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And when three or four days have passed, then you untie the bandage, because you will find the bones swollen, broken, or dislocated, and the operation for those is just as you know.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	And if some teeth are broken, then restore them, and align them as I teach you in the restoration of the teeth of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And then place the fractured finger under a splint according to the length of the finger, and move it slightly to one side; and then lay the foot on this table that is recommended to you, and secure it with a proper tightness.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	And if what is fractured involves two or three or more bones, then place a splint wrapped in linen cloth on each finger according to its size, and secure the table at the lowest part of the foot, standing over one end of the table, pierce the sole of the foot so that it holds firmly in place. 
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is important for you not to forget that you should not consider all the causes which have been told to you in other fractures of the accidents we have mentioned; and prepare yourself with everything needed for any such accident.
Capitol .xviii.	Capitol .xviii.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of the fracture of the pubic bone of the woman and of the bone of the penis and the penis of the man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the neck of the woman is broken, then make that cut in that fallen area, and then tilt her to one side of the back a little, and she should be held from behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And then the midwife fills the container with broth, and it is made in the container as desired; and then the woman is shaken, and the back of the small one is raised little by little, for all this is forgotten until it is before the opening of the container as desired and the broken bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And then place pillows under his back, and when he wants to urinate, move the clothing easily aside so that he can urinate, then return and restore it in the manner you placed it initially, and then return him to his original pillow.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do this for seven days or around that time, for it is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you want, take a sheep's bladder and place a reed tube over his wound; insert the entire bladder into his anus, then blow into the tube with force so that the bladder inflates inside the anus, for the fracture will return to its proper position.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And then it should be filled with cloth and left in place for several days as we have recommended, until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bone of the thigh in a man or woman is broken, then administer to its restoration and alignment what we have recommended for the hip bone.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And what is right is not hidden in these rare and nearby fractures, especially for one who has some study and use and understands my book well; for that fracture signifies to you the major adjustments via proper methods in its restoration and tightening, therefore understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	And when the man's penis is injured, take some goose fat and put the penis in it; then cover it with a cloth wrapping, keep it wrapped up, and leave it for three days or so, and it will be healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	On the restoration of fractured bones when they are injured.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for one who suffers a fracture with an injury, especially if the bone is large such as the thigh bone or the femur, or similar to that, that you should care for it and perform trepanation immediately if the conditions for trepanation are suitable for you or are testified as we have said above.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the wound is bleeding, then you must take care to stop it by powdering some crushed eggshells over it, unless another method is more suitable for you.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And then begin to restore the fracture on the same day, and do not delay this, unless an abscess occurs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	And if you encounter an abscess that needs cauterization, then you should delay the restoration of it until the ninth day, within which time the abscess must be drained, and do not approach it on the third and fourth days at all, for you would cause bad accidents. 
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	And if extension is not prepared by you and the reduction of it with your hands, then you reduce that with your hands using this instrument; and the instrument which is made of iron has a length of seven digits or eight and a width according to the amount of the injury; and therefore it is necessary for the doctor to take three or four of these according to what is needed for this in the treatment in every kind of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And it should be round, and slightly thin at the ends so that it does not bend when you apply pressure on it during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And it should have a sharp end with its edges at the extremities; and the top of it should be gradually thicker, and from the middle inward to the finer parts.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the form of it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is named in Greek “labre volentz atelarem,” which means a slightly bent paddle.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	Therefore, it is necessary to raise the end of the instrument above the prominent part of the bone end.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And push that in at once while returning the bone, and it should be aligned with some adjustment.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And so you should strive to align the ends of the fracture between them, and if the broken end is delicate and does not hold firmly enough for proper fixation, then it is necessary that you incise the end of that bone so that the instrument can have a better grip.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	And if you cannot reduce the bone completely by the methods we have recommended, then cut it with one of the incisors that we have mentioned; or saw through it with one of the saws in whatever manner is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	Then smooth out any roughness and small splinters that remain on the bone.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced, and after the reduction, the patient experiences intense pain, then you should know that the bone has not been returned to its natural position; and then do what you can to provide great relief to the patient.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	Once your restoration of the bone is complete, then soak a cloth in black styptic wine, and especially if it is summer, do not place cerot or any other oily substance on the wound, so that it does not cause putrefaction and corruption.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then administer poultices at the time of the bone's complete restoration, and leave the wound uncovered in such a way that you cut the scab with scissors and use bandages according to the extent of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And be cautious to not strain the wound with the fracture, for many times foolish doctors have done this, causing their patients to suffer death or a corrosive or putrid illness, which is gangrene.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if your fracture is slight, soft, different from the other fractures. 
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the wound is large or it is a bad wound, and you fear the occurrence of harmful accidents that we have mentioned, and you find pain in the area, then do not place a bandage over it, but instead make a wrapping with hard cloths in place of the bandage and bind it tightly.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when after one or two days the wound begins to fester, so that pus is generated in it, then you remove from above the cloth which you had placed over that area, and then administer plasters, ointments with which it is customary for us to treat wounds, such as tetrafarmacum ointment and similar ones.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And it is necessary for you to loosen the bandage and examine the wound every morning and evening until it is consolidated and healed, and it must be that the limb is prepared in such a manner that the pus can drain from it to its parts easily.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If many days pass over the wound, and it is not consolidated nor has the pus separated from it, then you know that there are signs of small problems, for which you must examine the wound with a probe.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those signs, those that are separated should be removed and extracted. Those that do not separate and cause the limb to swell and induce pain, you must incise them as much as it is possible for you to do so.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if the wound develops gangrene or eluchen (a type of infection), which is a sign of corruption and putrefaction, then you must apply one of those treatments appropriate for it, as was previously described in its own chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And of this in which it is necessary that my speech stays and you present your foot: when the thick bone is broken, elevate above the limb as with the bone of the thigh and the helper and similar to those of the large limbs, and do not assume traction from it, nor its extraction because several times accidents happen by which death occurs; leave that inside so it may rot, for surely it will fall out by itself in about twenty or thirty days; and now treat the wound if visible to you, and if not leave it as is.
Capitol .xx.	Capitol .xx.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	For the given sentence:
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Here is the translation of the provided line:
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider if the swelling is recent and administer those medicines which have astringent properties such as alum, salt, myrtle, sage, gall nut, and similar ones; in this way take some or all of these, mix them with wine that has astringent qualities, or with egg white, or with pleasant wine, apply that mixture on the swelling using tow (a type of soft material), and bind it tightly over it with good compression.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And leave the compression on for several days without removing it; then remove it and repeat another round until the swelling is reduced; or apply a piece of lead over it gently, because lead has the property to reduce all that is inflated in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if the swelling has already turned into a hard stone and is tight, and it is necessary to carefully remove it, then cut into it at its highest point, and excise the excess and prominent part, or reduce it with caustic remedies until it is diminished; and care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	On the restoration of a fracture when it is set, and then the limb remains delicate and does not heal according to its natural course.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is restored, and then the limb remains thin and weak, this does not happen except for various reasons: one of which is an excessive loosening of the ligament and binding not done as required; or due to an excess of tightness in the ligaments that prevents nutrition from reaching the limb; or because of excessive rubbing; or by unnecessary movement not at the right time; or due to a lack of blood in the patient’s body and their weakness.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the treatment for this is to give the patient food and make their heart tender until blood is multiplied in them; and administer bathing; and bring joy and happiness to them.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	Then place a poultice on the limb so that the poultice attracts the necessary nutrients, or continue to apply warm water rubs until the nourishment flows and returns to its natural state.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	On the treatment of broken bones when they are restored crookedly and preventing the proper operation thereof.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When you encounter a restored limb near the healing of its curvature and prominence at the broken bone and knotting, and it is by this change in shape of the limb, yet however the limb is not hindered from its natural function, then there is no need for you to believe the words of those who think that the limb is newly broken.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	But there are foolish doctors and restorers who have done this in our land; and this operation is greatly reproachable, leading to great fear, the sign of which is deadly.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	But if the limp and knotting are recent, then they must be treated with warm water in which mollifying herbs are boiled, such as the leaves of elder and its roots, mallows, and similar ones; and it should be made into a poultice with a softening plaster like well-made dialaquilon; or mucilage from the root of elder can be taken and mixed with chicken fat or oil of cerami, and then applied in a poultice; or plump figs can be crushed with pigeon droppings, and similar medicines used for strengthening consolidation.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And sometimes it is dissolved by persistent light friction with wet hands, and the movement of the limb should be administered in all parts at all times.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.
Capitol .xxiii.	Capitol .xxiii.
De sermo en dislocacio.	From the text provided, it seems like a medieval medical treatise with a mixed vocabulary from languages such as Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Based on this context:
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e favenir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, then it must be immediately reduced, and do not delay this reduction, for if delayed, the area becomes inflamed and swollen, making the reduction of the dislocation difficult.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for this reason, it should not be massaged or stretched during the time of inflammation, because doing so can bring about spasms and severe pain.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	However, when this occurs, then you must prepare for the incision of the patient, and allow it to rest until the inflammation subsides; then the limb should be anointed with warm water and oil, and afterwards, it can be reduced easily.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And every limb should be treated in such a way that the memory of its proper place will return to it. 
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And I have already ordered the chapters of dislocation as they are preceded in fracture; from the part of the body most superior to the one more inferior.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Capitol .xxiiii.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	For the translation of the provided sentence:
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	So dislocated the two jaws do not make noise; and the dislocation of both is done according to one of two ways: either they are slightly displaced from their places by a small movement, and thus softened a little; or they are dislocated completely and entirely, in which case they are softened at the joint area until saliva flows from the patient and he cannot hold it nor close his mouth, and the tongue of him is wrapped in his words.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	When the dislocation is slight, then in most cases it returns by itself with little cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	But if the dislocation is complete and total, then it must be treated with a gentle reduction, and should not be delayed at all.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And it is that the minister should hold the patient's head, and the doctor should insert one finger of one hand into the area of dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth of the patient if the dislocation is on one side; or the doctor should insert both fingers together if the dislocation is on both sides, while keeping the other fingers outside to balance; and the doctor commands the patient to relax their jaws and allow them to move from each side; and the doctor balances the jaw and pushes it until it returns to its place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction of it is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated, then administer evaporation with hot water and oil until a gentle reduction of both is made, and do not delay the reduction of both at all, as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And then when they are returned and balanced, and the patient's mouth is closed and not loosened, place over them cloths with cerot, which is made of wax and oil mixed together; and then bind it easily with soft bandages.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient sleep on their back, and let his head rest between two pillows, so that he does not turn to either the right or left side; and do not force them to chew anything; before their food is properly softened by the teeth, when the pains are diminished and the jaws relaxed, then let him eat what he desires.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And this should be administered easily, and do not work against the opening of the mouth by forcing food, drink, and speech, until the jaw is relaxed and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if it is difficult to reduce two dislocated jaws when they are out of place and do not return to their proper positions, then fevers often occur and there is frequent sweating, and the patient's stomach becomes greatly distended, and they vomit pure bile.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see this, then know that it is a sign of deterioration; and often the one to whom this happens will die within ten days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	On the reduction of the dislocation of the clavicle and the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of him is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And then compress the area with your palm using strong compression, for it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And then place an ointment and poultice on that area and strengthen it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	May the extremity of that which is sick and continues with it not be dislocated on any day; therefore, it must be reduced and treated as we have said and according to what you are prepared to do. 
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And then place an ointment, and pillows, and bind it tightly, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until they are healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And with this method of treatment, the extremity of the muscle is returned to its proper place when it is separated from its location.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the reduction of muscle dislocation.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle is dislocated in only three ways, one of which is when it is dislocated at the joint near the tendon.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is when it is dislocated at the upper part of the muscle, and this happens slowly; and it is not dislocated behind by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated in front by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And it is most often dislocated and protrudes at the lower parts near the joints, especially in those whose flesh is sparse, where it dislocates easily; but in those with more flesh, it protrudes with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And forcefully shake them for some people percussion or impact, and the muscle of it is inflamed by a hot abscess, and it is known that it has already been dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Therefore, it is necessary that you proceed with this while you are properly positioned above him, and then continue with his treatment.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And it is known that the dislocation of a limb is when it affects parts that should not be affected by tremors; so as to distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy muscle, for you will find clear differences among them; you will find at the head of the dislocated muscle a concavity where you should feel with your hand like touching an egg, and the patient cannot bring their hand to their ear or move it in any way.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If the foot or its joint is dislocated and you now find it clearly by touch, and it is not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And this dislocation is easily reduced when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction is when the practitioner lifts the limb of the patient upwards; then place your thumbs at the joint, and forcefully elevate the joint back to its proper position, and the practitioner raises the limb, extending it upwards; then place it down so that it returns easily.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	But if it does not return by what we have said and remains as it was at the beginning when the dislocation occurred for several days, then the patient must be bathed in warm water and given a poultice that softens and loosens just as if it were a mixture of rye, fenugreek, and mallows in water, and it should be administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And then the patient should be placed on their back and their joint should be covered with a bundle of wool that is neither too light nor too tight. Then the doctor places his foot on the bundle, lifts the head of the muscle with strength, and pulls the patient's limb so that it does not remain misaligned, while another practitioner holds the patient’s head to prevent any misalignment, for it will soon return to its proper place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, reduce that hernia in this manner: which is to have a man present who is taller than the patient, and he stands on the side opposite [the hernia], and inserts his muscle under the swelling of the patient and lifts the swelling upwards while the patient is suspended in the air, and another assistant pulls the hand of the patient from the sides below his abdomen.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	And if the patient is light, then it must be suspended with something else that causes weight, so that [the hernia] becomes heavy, for the dislocation returns quickly.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it can also be reduced in another manner: which is to fix a long pole into the ground with its head rounded like a mortar's pestle, neither thick nor thin, and then place it under the patient; once placed, cover the head of the pole with lion's cloth, and have the patient stand along the length of the pole, and then extend their hand towards the opposite side; and stretch out their body on the other side with force, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if the reduction is difficult due to all the causes we have mentioned, then use this treatment: which is that you take a pole whose length is two cubits, and its width is four fingers, and its thickness should be light enough under the swelling in this manner:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And then place linen cloths over the round head so that the splint does not hurt the patient. 
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And then the patient's body should be laid down, and their arm or hand should be extended over the stick placed between the parts underneath them, and the stick should be wrapped around the helper, the arm, and the extremity of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Then place the arm on a step of the ladder according to the latitude, and the hand should be extended towards the parts below it, and the other body part should be suspended from the other side, for the joint will soon enter.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the insertion is complete according to whatever method is possible for you, and now it is necessary that you place a thin layer of wool of equal quantity; then apply a plaster prepared with powdered mallow and egg white over all the muscle, so that it covers above, and then secure the thin layer with an appropriate bandage; and the dressing should be wrapped around the plaster, and the hand of the patient should be attached to his neck, and it should be left like this, and the hand of the patient should not be moved for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And it is necessary that the diet of the patient be light, until the limb is strengthened, for it is easier on the recovery of him.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	Then the diet should be gradually increased after seven or five days and exercise should be performed; and if it is stabilized and not softened, then it is healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	But if the joint is dislocated repeatedly due to humidity that affects it or for other reasons, then it is necessary to apply a cautery with three strokes, as was previously stated in the chapter on cauterization.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this is done and after seven days the bandage is removed and the joint is not healed, and the plaster and the binding are reapplied several times but it does not heal and the arm cannot be raised to the parts above, then you know that the nerves of him, which are at the head of the muscle, have been cut or stretched or weakened, and understand that the joint will never be properly set in its place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	Regarding the dislocation that occurs in the feet and the ankle or the parts behind it, the reduction is made with impulse and extension using the hands until it returns to its place.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And another binding should be applied, and care for it until it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if during the healing process you notice heaviness in the limb and slowness in its movement, then the patient should use baths several times until that heaviness is alleviated and it returns to its original state.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the treatment of dislocation of the knee.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	Know that the joint of the knee is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated in all directions, but more so forward than backward, and the dislocation is not hidden from you when you see or touch it according to whatever shape it has been dislocated into. And when you adjust the dislocated knee with your hand, this is made manifestly clear to you, for the joint is concaved and cannot bend the leg, nor can it touch its own muscle with that part.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And it is necessary to treat and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before an inflammatory swelling occurs, for if an inflammatory swelling does occur, reducing it becomes difficult, and recovery is not complete; especially when it is in the posterior parts, for it is worse than all other types of dislocations, more painful, and often leads to death with it.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of it, when it is one that can be reduced, is to extend the leg with both hands, and expand the thigh, placing the doctor's hands on the knee and below it, and pressing the joint with the palms of his hands together, or with the edge of his palm until it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	And if the dislocation is in the anterior parts, then return it by bending the arm with your hand, until you hit the elbow with the edge of your palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not obey to the reduction, then administer strong extension and forceful movement.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And it is that two ministers extend the arm, and those two ministers hold the limb firmly so that the extension is not hindered.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	Then the arm should be rotated in all directions, since it is wrapped with a long folded cloth over his hand or joint.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, anoint it with some oil so that those causes which help in the lubrication of the joint are facilitated; then forcefully push the joint until it returns to its proper place.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	Then for the reduction of a dislocated shoulder, it should be placed on a padded support where it is tightly bound and compressed with egg white, and it should be pulled out with downward traction, and the arm should be suspended from the neck and left in this position for several days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	Then it should be loosened; and if the joint is placed back in its proper position, you should untie the binding from it and leave it as such.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see the joint not well strengthened, then repeat the plaster and the bandaging, and leave that for several days until it is sufficiently healed; and then remove that.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	And if you encounter severe swelling near the reduction of the joint, and its position is in motion, then apply moistening through baths and gentle friction, and compression until it is relieved; or place on the joint a supportive bandage, which is something to prevent unnecessary movement; and then bind that over the bone day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then remove that, and put it in a bath; when it floats, then you should rub the joint with moderate friction, and then apply a supportive bandage again, which is to prevent movement, once, and the second time, and the third time.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	with continued bathing until it is healed.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, place on it the split of a moist and scraped cow's hide and press on it; do this several times, for it is moist and will help return it to its proper position.
Capitol .xxviii.	Capitol .xxviii.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	For the treatment of a dislocation of the shoulder, that is, of the joint between the arm and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	When the hand's joint sometimes gets dislocated, and the reduction of its dislocation is light, the opposite applies to other joints; however, it must be swift in reducing it at the moment it becomes dislocated, before the area becomes inflamed or an abscess forms there.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of its dislocation is that you place the patient's hand joint on a table and the assistant stretches that hand, while the doctor places his hand or palm over the prominence of the joint and pushes until it returns to its proper place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, it must be considered that if the palm is already dislocated towards the back of the hand, then the patient should place the back of their hand on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is towards the back of the hand, then the position of the hand should be placed inwardly on the table so that the doctor's hand falls over the prominence of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And if it returns quickly, that is good; and if not, then strengthen that area with a soft bandage while allowing the inflammation to subside. If this does not work, do not attempt reduction again because thereafter you cannot force or accomplish the reduction of pus formation that occurs after a few days.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	But however the joint remains according to its tortuousness; and there is no noticeable cause in the patient, except that the hand is softened and cannot grasp any cause; therefore you know that the nerves are broken or crushed, and now there is no remedy but to tighten it with a cautery near the place of injury, and thus confer some relief.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	When the limb has returned, then place over it the poultice we have recommended, and let it be left and tightened for five days; then untie it and leave it, and exercise the hand of the patient.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	But if the movement of it is hindered and some heaviness occurs in it, then alleviate that with warm water and by rubbing it several times until it is relieved.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	On the treatment of dislocation of the fingers.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Sometimes the fingers can be dislocated completely.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when any of those fingers is dislocated on the back of the palm or on its belly, then hold the finger and push the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And then support the head of the finger, suspend that part which is dislocated, and leave it like this for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then suspend it and extend it until it is straightened out on that same day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when it is not in use at night, bind it according to that method, and do not stop unwrapping it during the day and exercising it with movement, and bind it again at night; do this for several days until it becomes straight.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And do the same if it is dislocated at the wrist, bind it in that area and perform this as your first operation until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And similarly do the same when it is dislocated in other areas.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	On the treatment of dislocation of the spine vertebrae.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When a complete dislocation occurs in any of the spine or neck vertebrae, and multiple vertebrae are displaced from their positions, then it cannot be treated, for death is expected in the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And the sign of this is that the excretion of the patient happens outside of their will, and they cannot retain it; and often some of their members or one or two thighs or arms are softened, or one vertebra slips out of place, for often it slips and often it moves to four directions.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Therefore, that area is already swelled behind and is called gelbozitation.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	And the cure for it is that you then consider whether the yellowing occurs due to childhood, for in that case there is neither a cure nor a healing from it.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	Here is the translation of the provided text line by line into English:
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And it says that in gout which occurs from the area in front towards the feet, neither generation nor cure of that condition exists; and similarly for that which affects both sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And of those [diseases], none is cured except that which occurs on the back properly with what I recommend.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And it is that the patient should be laid on their stomach near a wall, and a moist warming device should be placed under them so that their feet are not cold.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And then a straight pole should be placed, stuck into the ground at one end near the head of the patient, and another pole on the opposite side near the feet of the patient at the other end.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And the minister should hold the rod, and it should not be fixed in a socket; and another minister should hold the other end according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then wrap around the head of the patient and leave the threads loosely tied; extend the end of the thread to the rod which should be at the head of him, and tie that in place; then tighten the other thread over his hips and buttocks, aligning with his chest; and finally adjust all the threads and tie those to another rod which is aligned with his feet.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And then the minister should extend the thread to the end of the rod, and the two rods and the threads should not remain in their original positions where they are placed, but rather should not be fixed as we have said. 
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor places his palms on the spine with strength until it returns, or he places the patient on a table, and then positions the patient's feet on the table until it returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	And if it does not return by this method, then take a table whose width or length is about three cubits, and make an opening in the wall next to the patient where one end of the table can fit.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And then place the middle of the table on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and strains well between so that the spine is compressed and returns to its place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you want, use a handle that is turned with the hand; and this is how you should do it: place the head of the patient between the rear ends of two poles, each pole being one arm's length long, and place the head of the patient between the rear ends of another set of two poles; and the distance between each pole should be a palm’s width, and already there should be a hole in each pole through which the handle turns, and each end should be firmly fixed to the ground so that it does not move.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And there should be one round pole in which the handle is placed, and it should be rotated in the two holes of the two poles.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at one end of it, there is a hole in which the pole is inserted, the length of which is a palm including what is rotated; and in the other two poles, it is similar to that.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then tighten the ropes that you have stretched on the patient’s feet in the hole where the head of the patient is placed, and the ropes that you have stretched on the patient's thighs in the handle where the feet of the patient are placed.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then you should have each turn and let a minister twist the turn with his hand, and the doctor applies the splint as we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the form of the treatment:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And then when the vertebra is returned to its place and the area is smoothed out, it is necessary to apply a drying poultice with egg white, and then lint; and then place over the poultice strips of linen cloth whose width should be about three fingers or so, and the length as much as needed to cover the site of the dislocation, and over the part of the vertebra.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then bind it with the bandage we have mentioned, and let the patient consume subtle nutrients until they are healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if any prominence remains in the area at the end of the healing process, then medicines that mollify and cleanse must be administered with the prolonged use of the table we have recommended; and a plate of lead is already applied to that area.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And sometimes prominence occurs at the rear of the spinal vertebrae, and it is caused by that dislocation; and it is that bone which protrudes, so it should not be treated with this medicine, for applying it could cause serious harm to you.
Capitol .xxxi.	Capitol .xxxi.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	For the translation of the given sentence:
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Know that the joint of the bone and the joint of the muscle can only suffer dislocation, and not the same issues as other joints with smaller movement and concavity.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the joint of the ankle is dislocated in four ways, for it can be dislocated inward, or outward, or forward, or backward.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And it is most frequently dislocated inward, and rarely forward or backward.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And the sign of its dislocation inward is that when you align the leg of the patient with the healthy one, it appears longer and the heel is more prominent than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their foot towards the sole, and the place where the sole should be is swollen due to a hematoma, so that the thigh’s end has already reached here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the sign of dislocation outward is that the symptoms are contrary to those described above.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	And the sign of dislocation forward is that the leg extends completely, but it cannot bend due to pain in the heel. If one attempts to walk, they cannot do so forward; the urine is retained, and the sole is swollen with a hematoma, causing difficulty in movement on the talus.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And the sign of one to whom a dislocation occurs in the posterior parts is that he cannot straighten his leg, nor can he bend the front part before bending the knee, and the thigh on that side is shorter than the other, and the knee is softened, and the head of the femur is displaced from its normal position.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	More on the reduction of this type of dislocation is that you consider now whether the dislocation is old and ancient, which has already become stiff by having been close to you administering reduction to it and remaining in its position; then it is not entirely in that cure; and thus there should be no attempt at prognosis.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	And in the case where the dislocation is recent and it is one of the four types of dislocation, then you must take care to return the joint to its place and extend it towards both internal and external parts, and move it to the right and left, for thus it easily returns and does not require further treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	But if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a strong assistant and extend the arm of the patient from the part below, or with his hands, or bind the bandage which is laid over the arm above the elbow; and another assistant extends the hand of the patient upwards so that he places his hands below the armpits; and then bind with a bandage over the root of the thigh, and have another assistant hold the end of the bandage.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And the extension of it or of the part internally to the angle of the fork, or of the part behind to the part of the back. 
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And let there be an extension of all these at once within which the patient is lifted with their body off the ground and remains suspended.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this kind of extension is common to all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And therefore, if the dislocation returns with what we have said, it will be good; and if not, then in every case it is necessary to speak of the proper cure.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of the joint, when it is dislocated and the dislocation is within the parts, the patient should be laid on their side; then place the ligaments over the thigh at that spot between the head of the thigh bone and where the tendon lies; then extend the ligament from the knee area to the higher part of the fork (likely referring to the hip or a similar anatomical structure).
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And then another minister should take the arms of the patient, and firmly grasp the thick part of the diseased thigh and extend it outward with strong force, for this will return it to its proper place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this method is a more gentle cure with which this member is reduced compared to the other methods.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	But if it is necessary for you and you do not obey the treatment with this method of cure entirely, then it is necessary to bind both feet of the patient together with a strong, gentle ligature, over both ankles and both toes.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And let the length of each thigh be four fingers wide, and let the patient's chest be extended more than the other by two fingers.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And then the patient should be suspended over the head of the post, and they should be in a house; and the length from the ground should be two arm's lengths.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And then command a strong young man to hold the head of the thigh, and let another young man suspend the patient, and the other young man forcefully push the thigh, for the joint will return to its place quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And then two poles are placed, one under the feet of the patient and the other under the head; and then poles are arranged in the middle of the bed, covered with damp cloths, so that the patient is not harmed by the pole being between their thighs, for you must ensure that the extension to the parts below is not hindered.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And then each minister extends to their part, and the doctor with his hand equalizes the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Thus, if it responds to the reverse treatment, it will improve greatly; otherwise, apply pressure on that area diligently as we have said for gout by equalizing it in this manner.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	But it is necessary that the patient lies on their side quietly.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is in the front parts, then it is necessary that the chest be extended slightly, and it is according to this same method described for bed treatment; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the diseased joint, and then compresses it with the other hand, and with this compression extends the part below towards the neck.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is in the back areas, then it is not necessary for the patient to be extended outwards, and they should be raised above the ground; however, they must rest on a hard surface. Similarly, this applies when setting it if the shoulder of theirs is dislocated outwardly, as we have said about placing them on two planks; and they are face down with their limbs stretched out, as we have mentioned, without delay.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And it is necessary to administer compression with a board over the area where you have placed the joint.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	And when the reduction is completed as necessary — and the sign of the reduction is not hidden from you, which is that you extend the patient's two thighs, and when you see them equal and the patient stretches their thigh and you expand it with their own strength, then you know that the limb has been returned as needed — and now you adjust both hips and place a splint and stretch with bandages in such a way that the width is not too tight in any part; and keep the patient at rest for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	Then loosen the bandage and the splint, and compare one thigh with the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	Now, if you see them equal and properly aligned, then you know that the dislocation is already fixed, and then allow the patient to go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any cause for softening, then you return and plaster that area, stretch it according to your initial structure, and leave it for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And then unbind that [area], and keep that person walking around for several days, until they are strengthened.
Capitol .xxxii.	It seems like you've provided a section marker, "Capitul .xxxii.", which indicates the start of Chapter Thirty-Two in a text, likely an old manuscript or book. Without additional content following this marker, there isn't any further text to translate or elaborate on. If you have more text from this chapter that needs translation or explanation, please provide it!
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	This phrase appears to be in an old Romance language, likely Old Occitan or a similar medieval dialect. It translates to:
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The jawbone is dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated outward, inward, and more towards the back; it does not get dislocated towards the front.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of its dislocation is that you command the patient to touch their shoulder with their chin; then you will know that the jawbone is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration for all ways of its dislocation is that you make the patient sit upright, ensuring that they extend their chin as much as possible; hold your two hands to their face, and place their chin between your feet; then use your palms to adhere to their jaw, holding them firmly between your fingers over their jaw with strength; another assistant should pull their foot inward so that the jaw returns to its place. 
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And a sign of recovery is that his chest adheres to his thigh with effortless ease.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then apply a plaster to that and make the chest adhere to the thigh, then bind those areas with a bandage for three or four days, and then unbind them.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not let the patient walk for several days until they are healed and strengthened.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	But if returning the hernia or intestine to its proper place is necessary, then administer strong extension using the ligaments, as previously described in the treatment of the hip.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	On the treatment of dislocation of the ankle.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The ankle is sometimes injured by slight movement and sometimes dislocated completely, and the dislocation can occur either inward or outward.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of its dislocation is that the ankle swells, depending on the side to which it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	And the treatment for the removal of it is easily reduced, and that it should be extended with ease by the hands and smoothed out before it returns.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	But in the treatment when it is dislocated properly, you must make the patient stand straight, and have a strong and brave assistant from behind the patient in the middle of them.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And then you hold the foot with your right hand on the upper part of it, and with your left hand on the lower part of the foot at the ankle area.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with your left hand for two times, and then extend with your left hand; and push the toes of the foot with your right hand away from the chest.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And do this twice as we have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then push the toes of the foot towards the chest for the third time, and you should be at the ankle.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	Thus, it returns in one attempt or two following this method, and if you turn the foot inward, that is good; and if not, then repeat the operation on it, for it will return.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if it is forbidden for you to reduce it by the method we have recommended, then have the patient lie on their back on the ground, and place a strong stick fixed in the ground, which should be between the patient's thighs, and you should wrap a cloth around it so that it does not hurt the patient.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And then the minister holds the patient's thighs, and another minister extends the foot with their hands or with a band that lies over the heel of the foot; and then each minister extends against the extension of their partner, and the penis is extended between the patient’s thighs while holding it in place so that the body does not pull back from its proper extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And then the doctor aligns the dislocation with their hands, and another minister holds the healthy thigh away from that side, for the dislocation returns easily.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And thus when the dislocation returns and you confirm the health of its reduction, then apply a plaster and bind it tightly with strong bandages, and tie the foot to the bed with bandages.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And you must be careful of the nerves that are behind the ankle, so that the bandage over it is not too tight and does not pull on them forcefully.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And then leave it for two or three days; and if the bandage becomes loosened, tighten it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And then untie it on the third or fourth day, and forbid the patient from walking for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if it is necessary to proceed beyond that space, there is no guarantee that the dislocation will not dissolve and corrupt, and then it will not receive cure.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if you cauterize the abscess, then it is necessary that you administer in the discharge of it what was previously mentioned in our narration, at another site for treatment and application, before it becomes corrupted.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Capitol .xxxiiii.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	For the translation of the given line:
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	Cover that which is dislocated with slight extension of its work; and this is not difficult, before it becomes lighter.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	If the dislocation is in some of the toes on the foot, then you must have the patient place their foot flat on the ground or on a table, and let them be positioned as if they were walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	Then you stand on it with your foot and place your foot over the area where you suspect the joint is dislocated. Then press that spot with your foot firmly until it returns to its proper position, ensuring that it lies flat and no swelling appears in that area.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	Then place the sole of his foot on a board that covers the entire foot, which has two supports, and then tightly bind it with a proper and firm bandage for three days. Then loosen it and let him rest and walk intermittently for several days until it is strengthened and recovery is ensured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	On the types of dislocations that are caused by blows, fractures, or any combination thereof.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any of those causes occur, and you proceed with the treatment and restoration, sometimes death may result.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And by this, it is not necessary for the patient to presume over his own cure, but rather it should be done by one who is wise in the art, of long practice, merciful and pious, neither hasty nor rash nor presumptuous; and that they begin with medicines that only moderately reduce swellings without completely curing them, leaving the patient's fate to divine judgment, unless it is for someone from whom you hope for salvation from danger, some relief from illness, in which there appears any hope. 
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And then immediately strive to reduce the cause at its origin in the beginning, before it turns into an abscess.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then if the limb returns as we wish, administer treatment that prevents the formation of an abscess and cure the wound with one of the most drying ointments suitable for it.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if a dislocation is accompanied by a fracture and occurs in separate bone parts, then you pierce the joint of them, and do as we have said in simple injuries of that which precedes in the areas of those bones.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And guard and avoid according to your ability those in the paths of fear as my teaching precedes you; for this is better for you to serve your Creator, and more lasting for your glory, and more beneficial for your body as you will see in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus perfect the words of Avicenna from which God be praised.
Amen.	Amen.
