Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Here is the translation of the provided line:
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre,  
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For the operation with hands is greatly prohibited in our region and in our time, except that some knowledge of it remains and traces of it are still visible; and nothing has remained of it except some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have altered much and led to errors and misconceptions such that its intentions are closed off and its strength and art are weakened.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it seems to me that I revive or rather apply that according to the order of this treatise in a way that includes exposition and clarification and abbreviation; and for this to come with the forms of the cautery tools and other instruments of the work through the addition of clarification, and for the preparation of them, which is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And by this Hippocrates means that it is not in the name but in the small deed, and especially in the skill of the hand. 
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	But we have already spoken of this in the introduction of this book; for whoever is not knowledgeable about what we have said about anatomy will not avoid falling into error, which can lead to the death of people, as I have seen too many of those who are formed in this science and fall from that because of their lack of knowledge and experience.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another doctor who took out a stone from a man who had suffered in his condition, and the stone was large, and he came to him and extracted that stone with a piece of the bladder, because that man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I have already called for extracting it, and saw that due to the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, I knew above him that he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And you saw another doctor who was receiving payment from a duke of our land for surgery, and they came upon a black castrated man who had a fracture in his thigh; and the doctor prepared with his ignorance, extracted the fracture, over the wound, with cushions and splints with strong tension, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And then release the binding according to their desires, and apply relief, and keep them dry for some days and command that we loosen the bandage; and this should be done until the thigh and foot become inflamed, and it leads to corruption.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I was called upon him, and prepared to loosen the bandage, and achieved calmness and alleviation of his pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	However, if corruption was already confirmed in the limb, because it could not be restrained, and the corruption would continue to spread within the limb until the patient was at risk.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And you saw another doctor who punctured a cancerous abscess, and it became ulcerated around those days, until the malignancy of it was greatly increased by its lord.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And by this, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation with hand be divided into two divisions: one is an operation which is associated with health, and in work with which there is danger in the greatest dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already expressed this throughout this book in which I found an operation that has error and fear; therefore, it is necessary for you to keep this in mind and let go of that, so that the pages do not lead you to speak out of turn and dishonor you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore take up your weapons with diligence and protection of God, and treat your patients with happiness and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best way by the grace of God to lead to health and favorable outcomes, and leave behind terrible diseases that are difficult to heal, and arm yourselves against what makes you fear, so that hesitation in your faith and in your name does not escape you: for more remains for your glory, and further yet in this world and afterward for your sanctities.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Here is the translation of the provided line:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Do not treat bad illness poorly, so that you are not named a bad doctor.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have already divided this book into three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter is ordered concerning the head down to the feet, in the forms of instruments and in the tools of cauteries, and of what is necessary in the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter is about drying and piercing, and about cupping, and plasters, and the extraction of arrows and similar objects, all chapters and orders concerning the forms of the instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	The division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter is about restoration and dislocation, and the treatment of fractures and similar conditions; this chapter is ordered from head to foot and includes the forms of the instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	About cauteries with fire and sharp medicines and a recollection of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	With that, the treatise on the entire book begins.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	It is necessary that I speak of the quality of the benefits and harms of that cautery and in what conditions the use of a cautery is prohibited.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore, I say that the discourse on the quality of the benefit and harm of cautery is long and verbose, subtle by science, and secretively hidden; many wise people have spoken about it, and they disagree among themselves; to me, a little of their discourses suffices, for fear of prolongation.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore, I say that cautery is generally beneficial to all complexions, whether they are with matter or without matter, except for two complexions, which are dry and without matter.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In a dry and cold complexion with matter, there is disagreement; for some say that cautery is beneficial for it, while others say the opposite, that cautery is not suitable for a disease that is by nature hot and dry, because the nature of fire is heat and dryness, and it is inconvenient that a hot and dry disease be treated with something that is burned and dry.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And those who say the opposite argue that cautery is beneficial in all hot and dry diseases that occur in human bodies, for when you compare the body of a person and its humidity to the nature of fire, you find that the human body is moist.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say by the speech of that person, who has experienced this to me several times openly.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	However, this does not apply to those who are already experienced and trained in the chapter of cauterization by previous practice, and have understood the diversity of human composition and the disposition of diseases within themselves, and their causes, and the accidents thereof, and the duration of time for them. 
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	And in other complex conditions, there is no need for fear, especially in cold and wet diseases, because all doctors agree on these, and they do not disagree about treating them with cautery.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, sons, that of the secret of healing by cauterization with fire and of its goodness, especially concerning cauterization combined with burning medicine, is that fire is simple, the action of which only reaches the member being cauterized and does not affect another adjacent member except with slight harm.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	And here is the translation of the given sentence:
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	Here is the translation line by line:
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, sons, that they forget the time in which it is appropriate to perform cautery and consider the best time of spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that cautery is appropriate at all times, so that the harm caused by accidental time is submerged in the healing brought about by the cautery, and especially if the cautery is for necessary pains or severe pains, strong and urgent, which do not tolerate delay because it is feared that malice may arise from them, which is greater than a small harm entering through time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And this does not fall into your feet, or, sons, this is only esteemed by the common people and foolish doctors; thus it is that to that disease which is cured by cautery it is not always effective, and they pause at that consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not as they think for this, for a cautery is nothing more than a medical practice that alters the composition and dries out the moistures which are the cause of the pains.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	But nevertheless, cauteries are abundant in medicine due to the desire for its value and the virtue of its operation and the greatness of its master.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that his illness may return at some time in the future, according to the complexity of the patient and the location of their disease, as well as their strength, and what has been prepared within their body due to the accumulation of excesses within them, and what they have acquired through their diet and similar causes; however, if the illness for which a cautery is administered is a subtle condition in members with few excesses and humidity, such as tooth cauterization for pain and similar treatments, it is possible that such pain may not return to him, but this applies only in small cases.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And the common saying is that cautery is the last resort of medicine, and this saying is correct, not in the way some people understand it, for I believe that there is no cure that truly succeeds without medicine or any other cause before resorting to cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is contrary to that; the intention that cautery is the last resort of medicine is only when we administer methods of cure in certain diseases, and those medicines do not yield results, then at the end of the treatment, one administers cautery, and it proves effective for that.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And now here it is clear that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the understanding which the common people and many foolish doctors hold. 
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the excellence of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the site of cautery does not make a scar, which is not absolutely true, for I have already tested this and found that it only happens in some bodies and not others, and cautery with gold is good and better than with iron as they said; however, when you do cautery with fire using gold, it is not clear to you because it burns according to the amount you want due to the hardness of the gold, and because it prepares to receive moisture; and if you place it over a flame, the gold melts from the heat, and some flakes fall into the fire causing the craftsman to be preoccupied with this.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And because of this, cautery with iron should be performed more lightly and more cautiously to correct the procedure.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already organized this chapter on cautery into sections, and I have arranged those of the foot within the feet, so that I enlighten the inquirer about what they want to know from it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Of cautery for headache due to coldness and humidity.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cautery confers dryness and heat on the accidental humors of which there are two causes: it is the cause of sweat and a multitude of rheumatic fluxes, called running from the head to the passages of the nose and ears, and much sleepiness, and toothache and earache, and universally all diseases that come from cold, such as paralysis, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cautery is as follows: first, command the patient to be evacuated with purgative medicine for three or four nights, according to the strength of the patient, their age, and their habits.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	Then command him to shave his head with a razor. Then have that person lie down between your hands on a lowered bench and place his hands on his feet.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	Then place the tip of your palm near the nose between his eyes, at the tip of his nose.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, when your middle finger has reached that spot, mark the area with a probe, and then heat the olive cautery, which has the following form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then place that over the marked area with tension, in such a way that it descends gradually, with which your hand is slowly tightened, and you turn that.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then lift your hand lightly and look at the area, and if you see any part of the bone exposed, about the size of a grain of barley, then raise your hand, and if it does not return by itself when you remove your hand with that instrument, or another one if it is cooled down, until the bone is seen as I have told you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a little salt and dissolve it over the area and leave it for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then place over it a cloth soaked in vinegar and leave it on until the heat of the burn is diminished.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with a four-part medicinal ointment until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And it has also been said that when the wound remains open, it is better to bathe it with wine, because it is better and more beneficial.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And some of them say that the area around the bone should be cauterized, and the cautery should be applied until some part of the substance of the bone adheres.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then remove what is adhered to the bone, and then heal it.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And others said that with the cautery reach the posterior area, pressing strongly on the bone until it smokes, and this is the method of small alphectomy. 
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they believe that from that place, vapors emanate from the head.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And if the wound is kept open for a long time, then it should be treated before it becomes solidified.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	But I have not seen these two types of cautery used on everyone, but only in some people out of fear; and leave that aside, you must tell me, it is better for health when it happens; for the head is affected by a discontinuity just as we have testified in other members, and especially so when the patient's head is of a delicate nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first type of cautery is safer and better, you must tell me; and with that method and using that technique, it is more beneficial for health.
Capitol segon.	Second chapter.
Del cauteri del cap.	About the cautery of the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When chronic and prolonged pain occurs throughout the head and persists in the patient, and you have used scrapings, cochlias, capipurgations, plasters, washes, cadels, guailines, and similar treatments, and especially if it has already been cauterized with a cautery that only contaminates and does not benefit from those causes, then consider whether the patient's head is of strong constitution in its nature; and if it is not delicate and finds great cold, then cauterize it with another type of cautery leaving aside that one.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then cauterize that area above the horn of his head with a cautery until the vein is severed. 
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the tendon and expose the bone by the amount we have recounted, and cauterize that area with a cautery at the back of the head in the spot which is called the sinus — and this is the location where the suction cup is placed.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And move your hand in this manner, and do not expose the bone, for the patient will find much greater pain from this than from the pain of all other cauteries on the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I will describe this cautery in its place, for the cautery with which you cauterize the crown of the head and the occiput is a finer cautery than that with which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is its form.
Capitol ters.	Chapter three.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	On the cautery of non-traditional migraine.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When pain settles in the part of the head or extends within the eye, the head should be cleansed with medicines, and other treatments, which I have described in the sections on diseases, should be administered; and if all this is not effective, then cautery can be applied in two ways: either by cauterization with an acute burning medicine, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	More cautery with medicine that burns is when you take a dose of alcohol, and you purify it and light the ends of it from both sides.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then you cut into the painful area on the temple with a slanted lancet until it reaches the spot where the pain is hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And then apply force over it with a bandage through continuous pressure, and leave it for the duration of three hours; and then remove it and draw it out elsewhere, and leave the wound open for two or three days, and then place something over it soaked in balsam until the area becomes warm.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish, do this with some combustible medicines, which I have written about in the two treatises on combustible medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	Also perform cauterization with an iron according to this method: ignite using a cautery iron, which has the following form:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	It is called a "claw clamp," because the head of it is shaped like a claw with some curvature, and in the middle part of it, there is a small prominence.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And then place it on the site of the pain, and hold your hand firmly — so that the artery beneath does not adhere — and rotate the iron little by little with speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the quantity of what is adhered by the pressure of the chain is such that it covers half of it, lift your hand so that the artery which is beneath is not compressed, so that blood flow does not stop.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then soak a cloth in salt water and place it on the area, and leave it there for three days; and then apply a cloth moistened with balm, and then treat with an ointment until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you do, cauterize with the tip of the cautery knife as a cautery, and be careful not to cut an artery in this modern non-traditional way. 
Capitol quart.	Capitol quart.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	From the cautery of ancient migraine.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat migraines using what we have said about the previous treatment and what we have mentioned in the divisions of diseases, and if the treatment does not improve, and sometimes due to the illness, what we have previously recommended with the first cautery or medicinal cautery is insufficient, then it becomes necessary for you to whiten the knife-shaped cautery until it is whitened [heated], and mark the location of the pain with a line as long as half your finger, or a bit more; and then place your hand once and press strongly before incising the artery and reaching the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to be careful with the continuity of the jaw, which is damaged by chewing, and that the tendon is not adhered and the nerves that affect it are not spasming.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it concerns the protection and caution of the blood flow from an artery that is being tied off, for there is fear during the tying off, especially for those who do not know what they are doing and are inexperienced and rash; and they leave the operation at its beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And I will come with a reminder of the regimen for accidental blood flow from an artery according to its method, in its place within this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see this illness is not helped by this cautery and the body of the patient seems tolerable, apply the cautery to the middle of the head as we have recounted, and treat the plague until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you want to, administer the cautery which we have mentioned in the chapter on arrow wounds with a cautery having two blades, and this cauterization is better and more appropriate.
Capitol .v.	Capitol .v.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Of the cauterization of ear pains.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When pain comes to the ear due to cold and is treated with laxative causes and with the other cure which I have mentioned in the division, and if the pain is not alleviated, then apply the cautery, and this one is called puncta, of which this is the form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And then puncture near the inflammation, and lead it around the entire ear as a wheel is turned, or in the circle of each segment if the pain is in each one.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	And then gradually move the cautery along the edge of the earlobe little by little until you have felt the area with your hand.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery of ten points is done all over the ear, clean that area, and then treat the places in between to heal them.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	On the cautery of tumors.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	A tumor that is treated with cautery is one of the types that come from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Cauterization is not suitable for the type of tumor that results from drying or spasm of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that kind of tumor with herbs, bloodletting, and fumigation, and if your treatment does not provide comfort, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one should be at the edge of the earlobe, the second a little below the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And place your cautery on the opposite side of the diseased part, because softening only occurs in the part that appears healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the form of cautery is that you cauterize that area with the cautery at the tip of the most prominent part of the earlobe, a little above the horn of the head, and on the temporal region another one, the length of which should be according to the length of the little finger, and place your hand with the cautery until the quantity of half the thickness of the skin is burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cautery, and it is made of iron, the shape of which is set forth here.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	However, it is more delicate that it appears just as you see; and it must be that the cautery is slightly less coarse in its thickness.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	Then treat the area with what has been previously described until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	On the cautery of old apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is old and you have treated it with what we have said and your treatment does not take effect and the patient has no fever, then cauterize that area with four cauteries: on all the horns of their head; and with a cautery at the middle of the head, as we have said; and with a cautery on the nape.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the method of the cautery is done according to what was said above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it is already cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; and it is more towards the rear; and then it is treated with what you proceed to use.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	On cautery for forgetfulness caused by flame.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	Those that should be given to the patient at the beginning are large jujubes and pills that cleanse the kidneys.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And then shave the entire head of the patient and place on their skull a plaster of cerate as described in the treatise on plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And apply that several times, for that is the method of cautery.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do this according to the order of the doctors which I have already mentioned.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And thus if healing is good through those means; and if not, then apply three cauteries on the back part of his head, which should descend from the highest part of the head towards the lower part near the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And pause between each cautery the thickness of a finger, and then care for the cautery as has been done.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	And if you add more and the patient can tolerate it, then apply the cautery to the middle area; and if you want to increase it further, now cauterize that area over both sides.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Then care for that area until it heals; and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to the form previously given.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On the cauterization of the appendix and the relaxation of the entire body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	You should proceed with the relaxation of the head using jars and as we have said; then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize that area with a cautery in the middle of the head, and with a cautery over all sides of the head, and with a cautery on the back part of it, and with three cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the illness of relaxing the body excessively and the patients tolerate it and the illness is severe, then cauterize that area with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and finally with a cautery until it is healed around the spine area, and raise your hand gently.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And then treat that which needs healing, and this should be done with an olive cautery.
Capitol .x.	It seems like you've provided a section or chapter marker, "Capitul .x.", which likely means "Chapter 10" in medieval text formatting. If you have more content from this chapter that needs translation or explanation, please provide it, and I'll be happy to help!
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Regarding the cautery for epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	The epileptic is not cauterized unless the epilepsy is due to phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And thus, it is necessary to cleanse the brain of the patient at the beginning with herbs and with the other treatments that we have mentioned in the section when the patient is strong and can tolerate the administration of medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who cannot tolerate the medicines, then administer small doses and masticatory treatments that cleanse the brain, for several days beforehand, with improvement in nourishment.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize it with a cautery in the middle of the head according to the previous method, and with another cautery on the occiput, and also cauterize each temple.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerates [the procedure], then cauterize that area with the cauteries I have mentioned, having paralysis and softening of the body over the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back. 
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And let the cautery be olive according to what precedes.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is a child, then apply a gentle cautery in this manner.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On the cauterization for melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humors and thick phlegm, then cauterize that area with the cauteries we have mentioned in the section on paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is an excess that turns to melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give them something to drink that purifies their brain, according to what has been mentioned previously in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	Then shave the head of the patient, and then properly apply a decoction made from it around the circle, and then place that in the middle of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And the patient should sit sideways, and be held from all sides.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	Then apply an ointment; and it is better to use old sheep's fat.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And warm that over the fire with a moderate heat by measure, which he says is best when it is more inside him.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And then place that in the middle of his head in the circle, and leave it inside so that it can be warmed.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do this with the patient throughout the week once, along with the other regimen of good food until they are healed; or if you wish, cauterize that area by making small points according to what is best for them, but make sure your hand holds a cautery arranged in such a way: this is a type of cautery which moistens the brain equally.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	Then place that embedded cloth in a bowl or in crushed mullein leaves.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On the cauterization of water descending into the eye.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When it is clear that water has begun to affect the eye by the signs which I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient something to drink that cleanses their head, and protect them from all moisture.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And have that [substance] soaked in a bath for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	Then command them to shave their head, and cauterize that area with a cautery in the middle of the head; then cauterize that area with two cauteries on both temples if it is the beginning of water flowing into both eyes, or on one side if it is the beginning of water flowing into one eye.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Cut with a cautery all the veins and arteries that are below the collarbone; and let the cauteries be at that length in the width of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And be careful of blood flows when it is being cauterized; and if you see any blood flow, stop it with some medicine, which is available to you.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And come with the wisdom of extracting veins and cutting them, and being cautious of blood flow.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And sometimes it is cauterized on the neck between two bones with two backward-pointed cauteries.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	On the cauterization of old tears (or chronic tear duct issues).
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When the tears of the eyes are old and persistent, and through the veins and arteries that are visible on the outside of the head, it is confirmed that this is due to cold and phlegmatic excesses, then cauterize those areas using a cautery as described in the chapter on the beginning of water flowing into the eyes. Apply a cautery at the middle of the head, and with two cauteries between the temples, and with two cauteries on the neck between two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you need an additional treatment, then cauterize that area on the entire side of the thigh up to the end of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Capitol .xiv.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	Of cautery for the foul smell from the nose.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat that illness with what we have said in the division and your treatment does not improve it, then prepare and give to drink to the patient some decoctions for three nights; then shave his head, and cauterize the area with a medium-sized cautery using olive oil.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	Then cauterize that area with a carnation-shaped cautery using two cauteries on both eyebrows, leaving the hair slightly untouched.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And be careful of the artery so that you do not burn it.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And this is the shape of the carnation-shaped cautery.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On the cautery for softening the eyelids of wounds.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the eye is softened due to illness or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with this lunar-shaped cautery; and this is its form:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you, cauterize that area above both eyebrows with two small cauteries in all parts, and let them be extended towards the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but rather to the extent that one-third of the eyelid is adhered.
Capitol .xvi.	Capitol .xvi.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	Of the cautery of the eyelid when the hairs are converted into particles inside and puncture the eye.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hairs of the stomach are converted into internal parts such that they puncture the stomach, cautery is applied in two ways, either with iron or with burning medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you use a cautery with fire, command the patient beforehand to remove his hairs just as they clean them, while they are long and shaved; and if you pluck those from their roots, then hold the areas of the skin with a bandage so that it is not harmed until the hairs have grown back.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	When they have grown back and are shaved, then place the head of the patient in your lap, and then apply something over the eyelids of his eyes with a template, shaped like a leaf of mercury, and let the beginning of the template be close to the hairs. 
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And then apply something soaked in egg white or in a lint paste over the wound.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And then heat the cautery, which has this shape.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And then cauterize over the figure which you have marked, little by little, in small increments, until the surface of the chain, which is like a myrtle leaf, is completely burned and clearly visible.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And the sign of health in your work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted and the hairs of it raised due to the puncture of the eye.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And then raise your hand and leave it for three days, and then apply something soaked in oil until the scar is healed.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if any cause returns through the hairs near their root and the eyelid is softened, then apply the cautery again over that area just as you did initially.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	If the hairs are in the eyelid, then cauterize that area so it is raised to its natural position and smoothed out, ensuring that the hairs do not bother the eye.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But the cautery with combustible medicine commands the patient to pull out the hairs so that they are extended and smoothed, and then make a form like a miter leaf from linen cloth.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And then take soap known and fresh herbs amounting to an ounce or as much as that, and thoroughly mix those ingredients well, and do this with a fomentation so that it is not chilled; and then spread this over the cloth which has been made like the form of a miter leaf, and place that on one eye or both; and place the eye lightly covered in egg white, and the patient's head should be in your hand.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And place your finger on the medicine and press it lightly without damaging it until the patient feels the biting sensation of the medicine, for the sensation is like a burning to them.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And when you perceive that the strong biting sensation has occurred, then remove the medicine and rub it with your finger; once the biting sensation ceases, then remove the medicine and wash the eye with water. Now consider if the eyelid is already lifted as washed, you should clean the constriction with fire or incision, for then it is well done; and if not, return to applying the medicine on the spot where it has not yet had an effect and continue until your operation is smoothed out and the eye contracts properly.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then place over the wound a border within which the chain of the adherence is eradicated, and then treat it with an unguent or another substance so that it may be healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you to perform your operation with vigilant diligence so that no part of the medicine falls into the eye. And if the eyelid near those days becomes softened and some cause from the hairs punch into the eye, then reapply your medicine on the area where the eyelid has been softened, just as you did at the beginning, and then surround it with a substance to be healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the form of the mirtle leaf. 
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And you should know that the wounds of men are diverse according to their magnitude and smallness, and therefore according to this your treatment is made.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And do not hide the path to perfection from one who is studying this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On the cautery of a fistula that is in the lacrimal duct of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula as we have described in the sections on diseases and your treatment does not succeed, then it is necessary to cauterize it according to this method: instruct the patient to rest their head on your lap, and have another assistant hold the patient's head with your hands in such a way that the head is neither strained nor moved.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then place a cloth dipped in egg white or in a paste of flour on the eye of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then heat the cautery, which has the following form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	Here is the translation of the given line:
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you want, proceed by entering into the other extremity. 
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want it to happen in such a way that it is attempted.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	However, that which is concave is better for the task at hand.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And then press the fistula if it is open, and extract the pus from it and dry that area.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And then place over it a cautery that is well ignited, and hold it in such a way that your hand keeps the cautery away from the nostril entrance, so that your hand does not tremble or disturb the patient, and then place the cautery on the ulcer of the nose and burn that area.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And if at the beginning of your cautery you penetrate into the bone, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice as needed; and leave it thus for three days, and then apply ointment to the wound and surround it with a drying balm until it heals.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	But if after eleven days it is not healed, then apply a sharp and corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed and scraped as you deem necessary in its treatment.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And there is another method of cautery for a fistula that some earlier practitioners said: penetrate the site of the fistula and open it, then place within that fissure a thin thread shaped like the area; pour into that fissure about one inch of melted lead; hold the thread firmly with your hand to ensure the patient does not move so that the melted lead does not reach beyond the intended area; cover the patient’s wound with egg white or water, for the lead adheres to the site of the fistula and heals it miraculously.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cauterization and treatment, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer a probe into the nose and reduce the fistula to the core of the nose according to where it will come to its proper place.
Capitol .xviii.	It looks like you've provided a chapter or section heading, which in this case is ".xviii." This translates directly to "Chapter Eighteen" in English. If there's more text from this chapter that needs translation or explanation, feel free to share!
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	This phrase appears to be describing the cautery of an anal fissure. A translation into English would be:
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Motives seen cause fissures in the lips, and especially in the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, when you treat those cracks with what we have said in the divisions and your treatment is not effective, then apply a small knife-shaped cautery according to this form that is shown:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And let the cavity of it be according to the subtlety of such a thing.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	And gently place that heated instrument into those cracks so that the cautery reaches the edge of the cracks.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with suppositories so that it may be healed. 
Capitol .xix.	The text you provided appears to be in an old Romance language that shows influences from Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Here's the translation for the given line:
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	Of the cautery of a fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When an abscess forms at the base of the uvula or on the palate or around the roots of the teeth, and then it swells, and subsequently bursts, and then becomes old, and pus flows out forming a fistula, and if your treatment does not lead to healing, then you must heat a cautery according to the amount received in the fistula, and then insert that heated cautery into the passage of the fistula, holding it inside until the hot iron reaches the core of it; this procedure should be done once or twice. Then treat it with what we have said about internal healing until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And thus, if the slough is separated and healed, that is good; but if not, then it is necessary to expose the area and remove the corrupted bone according to what will be described in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On the cautery of teeth and the soothing of veins.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When veins are softened by moisture and the teeth are painful, and if your treatment with medicines does not help, then place the patient's head on your knee, and then heat the cautery, the form of which will be described shortly. Place the quill over the tooth and quickly insert the heated cautery into it, holding your hand a little so that the patient feels the heat of the fire reaching the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And then lift your hand, and then repeat the cautery several times as you wish.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And then the patient should fill their mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, and afterwards spit it out, because the rotten tooth is hardened, the softened gum is strengthened, and the corrupted moisture is dried.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On the cautery of tooth pain.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When tooth pain is due to cold, or if it is cold or inflamed, or if you do not find relief with medication, then apply cautery in two ways: by using the horn of a cow, or by using fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cautery with horn is when you take the horn of a cow and boil it in iron water, then take a piece and wrap it in linen, and then apply it to the painful tooth while it is still hot from boiling until it cools down.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then repeat this several times until the heat penetrates to the root of the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you want, soak wool or cloth in the liquid mentioned above, and place it over the painful tooth, and place a heated iron on top of that until the iron reaches the core of the cavity of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	And yet, the cautery with fire is what you should pay attention to the needle of iron or bronze, and if there is any roughness in the core and the sharpness of the fire does not reach the mouth of the wound.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then heat the cautery which will take the form you desire, and place it on the tooth while keeping your hand inside to ensure the cautery is sufficiently heated; and do this several times until the pain subsides or on the following day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And it is necessary that by the application of that cautery, the patient fills their mouth with good food and holds it for an hour, then cleans it out; and this is the form of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize whichever extremity according to what is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the form of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On the cauterization of exstrophy. 
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When the swellings are caused by phlegm and cold humors and do not respond to digestion through medicines and you wish to digest those lightly, then ignite the cautery which has a shape as follows, having two curved ends so that smoke comes out from one end of the cautery, and place that ignited cautery once upon the swelling, and repeat if necessary until it reaches the core of the swelling.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the swelling is small, then apply the cautery according to the size of the swelling, and afterward leave it for three days and place a piece of cloth dipped in ointment over it until what the fire has burned is healed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	Then treat it with ointment and bandages until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the shape of the cannula or cautery for this purpose is as follows.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On the cautery for hoarseness of voice and constriction of the windpipe.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When the humidities come upon the canal of the lung, and especially when this happens due to cold composition, then it is necessary that the patient be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize those areas by applying a cautery to the root of the windpipe in the affected area.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And be careful not to penetrate too deeply with the cautery into the groin, nor burn more of the skin than necessary.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize that area with another cautery at the joint of the neck in the last vertebra of the spine.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And the cautery should be applied in the manner previously described.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Then treat that area with the method described until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On the cauterization for lung disease and cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung disease are caused by infiltrating humidities, and the patient does not have fever or consumption and the illness is chronic, then cauterize that area with two cauteries on the furcula (collarbone) at the points near the lungs and ribs; and with another cautery in the middle of the foot between the two malleoli; and let the cautery be applied according to the previous form.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, perform your cautery by puncturing with a cautery that is called "puncta," the form of which you precede in the puncture for ear pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And make points within these areas for them; and then treat that with whatever method which is prescribed until it is healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And here is the translation:
Capitol .xxv.	Capitol .xxv.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	Of cautery of hemorrhoids which is the head of the aiders.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the joint is dislocated due to slippery moisture and is not fixed at the time of its return, you should place its dislocation where it usually returns, and then with a small movement it gets dislocated again, as we have testified, so that first you reduce the dislocation, and then the patient should be turned over on his back or on his side; and then lift the chain which is inside the socket towards the upper parts using the fingers of your left hand, if the joint is dislocated inwardly.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then light the cautery having two heads; and this is its form:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the chain before it penetrates into the other side; and the figure of the cautery will come to have four heads.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And thus those subtleties depend on the quantity of tension; and this is its form:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And sometimes it is adjusted according to this count, and that is why there are eight cauteries.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then place salt on the cautery points, and subsequently secure the patient in tranquility, ensuring that the limb is not moved for some time until it is healed.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is in the upper parts and this has to be done, then cauterize over the muscle with a claw-shaped cautery or with multiple pointed cauteries, for the joint is confirmed, moisture is reduced, and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On the cauterization of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When cold and various humidities come into the stomach, causing it to distend beyond its natural composition and multiply rheumatic conditions in him, if you continue with the methods of treatment but do not achieve resolution, then the patient should lie on their back propped up, extend their arms and legs, and then cauterize that area with three cauteries: place one claw-shaped cautery under the feet for a length of one finger, and two other cauteries below each side of this cautery so that the shape of a triangular cautery is formed; space them out so they do not touch to avoid excessive burning.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is two-thirds the thickness of the chain.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And let the shape of the cautery be according to this form with this addition: And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle part of the stomach according to this form; and this shall be a cautery according to the shape of a circle according to this form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And let the stomach be cauterized in points to someone who is frightened by this cautery: and it means that you place on the stomach points according to the amount you want with a probe, and then cauterize those points with a cautery; and then treat that area with the treatment that precedes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	From the cautery of the cold spleen.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When pain in the spleen arises from cold or moisture or due to excessive wind (gas) that disrupts its normal composition through superfluous egression, and the patient is treated as we have said but does not improve, then the patient must be made to lie on their back, and you should apply three cauteries with a thread according to this form and quantity over the spleen below the hypochondria, which will help the patient's recumbent position.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And the space between each cautery should be according to the thickness of a finger, and the cauteries should be according to the length of the body straight.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not press too hard with the cautery.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the amount that is added equals half the weight of the chain, and it should not be any tighter; and if the patient is standing on their feet; and if they are not standing, then let them lie down, with their legs spread apart and their arms raised.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a knife-shaped cautery, when done with subtlety and prudence in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And be careful not to process too much during the cauterization, and let the application cover the entire chain so that it adheres to the whole body and penetrates into the intestines, for the chain here is subtle; know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On the piercing of an abscess in the armpit with a cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When there is an excrescence or abscess in the armpit and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the armpit or in its skin, then if it is in the flesh of the armpit, the patient will experience heaviness and sharp pain.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the skin of the armpit, the pain is very sharp and often the treatment can exhaust even the most skilled doctors.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, the patient should be placed face down on their cervit (likely referring to a type of support or bed); then probe the area of the abscess with a tent (possibly a slender instrument); then heat the cautery, which resembles a rod, the form of which has been described on the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize with that cautery until all the wound is burned, until it reaches the bone, until pus comes out.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that by treating other swellings until it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And it is not necessary to use this form of cautery except by one whose study in the art of medicine has been prolonged, and in whom many illnesses have been known; yet even this should sometimes be bold on this operation, yet still leave that to us, and it is better. 
Capitol .xxix.	Capitol .xxix.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	From the cautery of pleurisy.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then immerse it in oil and heat it over the fire, and then cauterize with a cautery at that spot which is between the continuation of the collarbone and the neck; and with two small cauters guide them slightly downward towards the area below the beard, and with two cauters on that which slopes between the fifth rib and the spine, tilting slightly to the areas behind; and with another cautery in the middle part of the foot; and with another over the stomach, and with three cauterizations at the areas behind; and with one cautery at that spot which is between both shoulders, and with two cauters from both sides of the foot, leaving the cautery which is between the two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And you do not need to touch your hand with the cautery, but rather apply it to the surface of the chain (likely meaning a specific part of the body or an area marked for treatment) in operation. 
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And the ancients have already said that some men use an iron cautery resembling a ray and heat it up, then place it in the location between the ribs, until they reach the abscess with it and clear out the pus, just as we have described for the abscess of the liver.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	And in this puncture with a cautery, there is no need for fear, because one dies immediately if you apply it to the location of the fistula that cannot be healed.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	On the cautery of the mole.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat the disease of the mole using what we have said about the treatment in the division and if your treatment does not succeed, then apply cautery to it in three ways, all of which are correct. One of these methods is to make three or four linear cauteries according to the length of the mole, similar to the shape of the liver cauteries, the form of which has been described previously.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And there should be the thickness of one finger or a little more between each cautery, and the method of the cautery should be the same method we have described for the cautery of the liver.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not bring your hand close to the cautery; and the patient should be lying on his back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And there is another method of cauterization, which involves heating the cautery with two burners, a technique we have described in the chapter on muscle dislocation, and lifting the bandage that is along the side of the thigh where the patient lies on his left side.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And let your elevation, with which you lift the bandage according to the length of the body, be such that cauteries can be made according to the width of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	Then insert the two burners, which you have heated, into that area where with them you penetrate the bandage from the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	Then remove the cautery; and thus four cauteries have been made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you wish, cauterize using a cautery with three burners.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	Then you treat the cautery after it has rested and stopped bleeding for several days, because it is more beneficial than other previous causes in the healing process.
Capitol .xxxi.	Capitol .xxxi.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	From the cautery of hydrops.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 proprietary.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you treat the dropsy with the methods of cure that we have mentioned in the division and do not conform your treatment, then it is necessary to cauterize with four cauteries around the navel and with one cautery on the stomach, and another cautery on the liver, and another cautery on the spleen, and two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and a cautery in the center of the foot, and another cautery on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the depth of the cautery should be determined according to the severity of the disease.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	Then leave the cautery open so that it burns for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the patient from treatment immediately after the cautery because it is necessary for two intentions to be added to it, and thus it will quickly aid in their recovery.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery with which the abdomen is cauterized should be key-shaped, according to the previously described form, and the shape of the cautery with which the back is cauterized should be olive-shaped, according to the previous description of its form.
Capitol .xxxii.	Capitol .xxxii.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	Of the cauterization of feet and of the thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are inflamed with dropsy and filled with watery fluid, you must cauterize the feet on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger, lift your hand with the cautery without twisting it; then raise your hand, but do not completely withdraw it, because the watery fluid will ooze out.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The cautery is made in this form: Then make two cauteries on both thighs, and let each one be performed with the pointed end of a knife-like cautery.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And let the cautery be according to the length of the thigh: place one at the top and the other at the middle of the thigh; and on each thigh, two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And leave the wound open for a long time so that some fluid may ooze out of it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	Then treat it with those causes which we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On the cautery of the abdominal area.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the belly is weakened by cold and humidity which impair its virtues, these being the digestive and retentive functions that reside in the stomach and intestines, it is treated with methods of cure rather than prevention. Sometimes patients have endured cauteries to exhibit virtue, so you should cauterize that with a large cautery on their stomach according to what has preceded in the cauterization of the stomach, with a circular cautery and four cauteries around the delicate navel, using a subtle nail-shaped cautery; and with a cautery over the alvine (related to bowels) area above the larger muscles, or with two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if you expel the excessive humidity and the patient can tolerate it, then apply a cautery over the bladder and over the intestines, and strongly adjust two cauters near the stomach and close to the inguinal area, for this is a perfect cure for quickly alleviating the condition without error.
Capitol .xxxiv.	It seems like you've provided a section marker, "Capitul .xxxiv.", which indicates the start of chapter thirty-four in a text. Since there's no additional content to translate or explain, if you have specific lines or content from this chapter that require translation or explanation, please provide them, and I'll be happy to assist!
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	This line translates to:
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When it is in the nature of old hemorrhoids or thick humors that infiltrate or corrupted humidities, and they are treated with what we have said in the division and you do not approve your own treatment, then cauterize with three cauteries on the pus of the lower vertebrae, small and small triangular, and with a cautery above the navel by two fingers.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you think that the stomach of the patient is chilled and the food of the patient is not digested, and their face often becomes inflamed, then cauterize that area on the stomach with a large cautery as previously described; and with one cautery on the spleen, and another cautery on the liver with a nail-shaped cautery, leave the cautery open for some time, and then treat internally to heal them.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	On the cauterization of the throat near the removal of them (the growths or affected areas).
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you cut away the growths, then ignite the cautery that resembles a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then insert that ignited piece into the severed artery, and keep your hand steady until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood is coming.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do this once or twice, for if they are too numerous, then cauterize each one as we have described, and then treat them with ointments until they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery on any area, it is more harmful to healing.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XXXVI.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	On the cauterization of fistulas that are naturally harmful in those areas.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the treatment we have recommended for it, and the patient is frightened by this, they should be treated with a cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when someone has a fistula that is naturally harmful and is old, it discharges pus and corrupted moisture. What is most appropriate in this case is to probe it with a fine needle, and then determine the depth of it with the aforementioned needle.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	And ignite the cautery that resembles a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And then place the ignited cautery into this fistula, according to the extent to which the probe enters.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeat the application of the cautery inside until those corrupted parts are burned thoroughly once or twice or thrice, according to the extent of your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And beware of burning the nerves and veins; or if the fistula leads to the body of the bladder or to the intestines, then be careful of all those areas; and do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy area and you think it is not penetrating further.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area inside until it heals.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the area is sealed off and the materials are cut off from it, and remain that way for a long time, then know that it is already completely cured.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the materials are not expelled from it, then know that it is penetrating either into the marrow of the corrupted bone or that this comes from those causes which will bring about a recurrence in its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Capitol .xxxvii.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	Of the cautery of hemorrhoids.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When hemorrhoids cause pain due to cold or excessive wind (gas), and thus the life of the patient is disturbed, then it is necessary to apply cautery on the hemorrhoids with a nail-shaped cautery over each one, for which the precise memory (procedure) should be recalled.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And apply the cautery strongly with a small interval between them, so that three linear cauteries will result, and thus they will be more effective in healing.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	Of the cautery of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When you encounter weakness and softening of the bladder due to cold and humidity such that the patient cannot retain urine, then apply cautery slightly above the bladder, where the pubic hair begins. Apply one cautery on the right side and another on the left side of it.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the number of the patient's fingers; apply the cautery at the lowest part of the back, or with two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And let the cautery be in the shape of a claw as it is processed. 
Capitol .xxxix.	Capitol .xxxix.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Of the cauterization of the thigh.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When cold and humidity come into the thigh, and because of this impregnation is prohibited, and their menstruation is corrupted, and the provocation of it is delayed, and you experience pain due to the retention of it, then the area should be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a cautery over the most affected part below the thigh, or with two cauteries, and let the cautery be a clavilh.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter XL.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When cold and moist humors are poured into the area of the ankle, and these cause it to slip out of its proper place, a sign of this is that one thigh appears longer than the other when compared.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the area of the dislocation is found where it bulges out.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then it is necessary to cauterize the patient on the area of the ankle with a circular cautery, after you have marked with your hand around the affected area as it is twisted, so that the dislocation falls in the center of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And it is the cautery with which the shape is preceded in the cauterization of the stomach. 
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize that area with three large olive wood cauteries.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And let the cautery be done according to the quantity of the thinness of the entire chain; and then care for that which needs to be healed.
Capitol .xli.	The text appears to be in an old Romance language that shares similarities with Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. The provided instruction is a chapter or section heading:
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	From the cautery of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain comes to the upper part, and it is caused by cold and moisture, the patient is treated as we have said and do not disagree, and this is outdated; now you must purge the patient of thick humors with foul pills or artificial pills or similar ones; then cauterize that area.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the method of cautery in this case is according to two methods: either cautery with burning medicines, or cautery with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	Follows according to two scientific methods, of which one is that you cauterize that area on the broad part with three triangular cauteries in this manner; and do so with them to achieve good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And let the space between each cautery be the width of a finger, and if the cautery is made of olive or grain [likely meaning olive oil or grain flour]. 
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	And sometimes it is necessary to apply the cautery at a specific spot on top of the ankle, making four cauteries.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, cauterize with the circle which precedes the form in the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle, and within that circle, burn off the protrusion of the entire tendon.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the method of cautery in surgery when pain is attached to the ankle and does not extend into the thigh.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	And if the pain extends into the thigh, then cauterize it with two cauteries on the thigh over the area where you will circle around the patient's pain; and with one cautery above the ankle by four fingers, you should cauterize the outer part.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cautery is knife-shaped, then the depth of the cautery should be according to the extent of the severity of the condition.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the patient indicates that the pain extends to the area near the toes of the foot, then cauterize it where they indicate with a cautery using three points or four or more if needed for that area.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the patient indicates that the pain is from the heel to the thigh, then cauterize it there with a knife-shaped cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And be careful in any cautery that you do not use the cautery so much that you burn nerves or large arteries, and by doing so, you harm the patient badly or cause contraction.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have seen one and another of those who cauterized on the ankle and ultimately in the cauterization, and the hot fire inflated inside until the tumor reached the foot, and the fire perforated and corrupted the entire foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And then apply a strong solution for the abdomen, and after that, death. 
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts at once, cauterize each according to this method.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise ones also spoke about the cauterization with this type of cautery, which is made in the following manner: make a circle of iron whose circumference is half a palm; and let its hole be as wide as a date seed or slightly less.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And within that circle, there should be another third; and the space between them should be equal to the thickness of a chicken's eggshell; and those circles should be opened from two sides; and the length of those rods should be one or two inches; and make on those iron edges properly shaped in the circles; and this is its form:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Then it should be heated in the fire until it becomes red-hot and emits sparks, and then place it on the affected part of the ankle, with the patient lying on their side.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And then cauterize that area with three round cauteries at once.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then leave it for three days; then apply a plaster to it, keeping the wound open for several days; and then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	And of the good cauteries for him who has suffered them, and find with that the spot on him.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	And with a cautery combined with adhesive medicines, you should make two circles having an armhole perforated in which they say is the width of an iron door hinge; let the length of the walls be in their nature either two nuts or keys whichever.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the spaces which are between each quantity of the thickness of a finger; and they should be opened below and above, and they should contain themselves in this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And then place over the joint of the knee the patient lying on their side, and press your hand over the joint of the knee; and then take warm water and pour it between two circles, and the quality of that should be close to a small fire little by little, and apply that for about an hour, and let the patient endure the burning and adjustment — for that will cause burning similar to fire — until the burning ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then raise your hand with the instrument and clean the warm water off the entire knee with cold water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then leave it for three days and place a bandage over it until the blackness from the burning is gone, and leave it like that for several more days, and pus will flow out of it; this is the final stage of healing.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain is spread in the thigh or the abdomen, apply the same procedure as was done for the knee, where water is used similarly.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the method of hot water, and I have already written about that in the treatise on the refinement of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Take equal parts of alkali and unextinguished ashes (likely meaning unslaked lime), mix them together, and place them in a new pot, one part of which should have a small hole perforated for the amount that will enter the ray (possibly referring to a spout or outlet).
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And place the bottom of the pot inside another inverted pot, and pour soft water over the alkali and live ashes to cover them by one finger's depth. Then, compress them with your hand with good pressure, and let the sharp water that drains out flow into the part below in the inverted pot.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	Then collect all that water and pour it over more live ashes and fresh alkali because this will result in a strongly acidic mixture, which is used in many medical procedures and for the cautery of other body parts, as this operation involves fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And regarding some medicines with which a broad cautery is performed, such as teztizic (possibly a specific medicinal substance), honey of anacranthus, ashes mixed with soap, among others that are combined.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Gaulus recounts an operation and treatment used by one of the ancients to cure pain in the ankle and sciatic vein, praising it highly as being very effective, saying that no other treatment is necessary, and claims that one application heals completely as he recommends, for after immersing that joint in a bath, it is already healed.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it is that rue should be taken, and if rue is not found, a fresh fig should be used; and it should be crushed with a little salt and placed on the ankle where there is pain, or on the thigh, or on the hip, and it should be bandaged.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And it should be left for a quantity of three hours or for the amount of time that the patient feels relief from the application.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then place him in a bath and when his body is warmed, put him into the sun, for the pain ceases and he is healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that it is not necessary for anyone to use a cautery with these medicines, only near the evacuation of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	But Escorides says that when the vein is cauterized with a goat's horn, it greatly benefits him; and the cautery should be applied in this second manner: wool should be soaked in old oil and placed between the toes of the foot and the fossil. 
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And then take dried goat fat and ignite it until it turns into charcoal; then place it on the wool and spread it out until it is extended.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And then repeat this process, and do not stop until the inflammation from the bite reaches the ankle and the pain subsides.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this method of cautery is called cow cautery.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On the cautery for foot pain.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Sometimes pain in the feet is caused by various reasons, such as from cold, or from a blow, or from excessive evacuation, and by causes similar to these, due to the infiltration of cold and moist matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cautery should only be applied in this specific case which is caused by the infiltration of cold and moist matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, after evacuating the patient with fitidal pills and similar remedies, apply three lines of cautery on the foot where the pain is, each line according to the width of the foot, and mark them with a thread, placing five cauterizations or more in each line, depending on the tolerance of the patient and their strength.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And let cautery be done with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, cauterize with three cauteries or with four using a medial claw-shaped cautery according to this form:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XLIII.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On cautery at the onset of jaundice.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Small yellow spots often appear with this disease in small children; and the sign of its onset in children is that it affects their structure, causing elevation and movement in the eyes.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And you will find that the lower vertebra of the spine and of the bones begins to protrude over the other vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And therefore, when you see this and wish to prevent it, then cauterize that area with a circular cautery according to this form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	so that the cautery covers the entire part of the vertebra equally.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you want, cauterize around the circumference of the vertebra with a pointed cautery, making two lines or three.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And let the points be placed close together.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	Then treat the area in between to heal it with what we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	Be careful not to apply the cautery to swelling that is caused by nerve spasms.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On the cautery treatment of gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and when pains occur in the feet, doctors customarily call this gout properly.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And thus, when gout caused by cold is treated with this method of cure and the pains are not alleviated, then use cautery to alleviate them.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And it is that you should cauterize around the joint of the foot with multiple cauteries after evacuation in the area of the joint.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let the cautery be an olive-shaped one, which has the following form:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pain rises into the fingers or other joints, and this often happens, then cauterize each finger with three or four cauteries all around using this olive-shaped cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if more cauteries than these are necessary for you, then cauterize accordingly and do not press your hand too hard with the cautery beforehand; only apply it around the area of the knot.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pain rises into the finger and the hand, then apply the cautery that we have mentioned in its chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pain is only in the muscles and it is called rheumatism, then puncture around the spine as it curves, puncturing along those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pain remains in the toes, then puncture around the spine above each toe and along the palm of the hand. 
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pains approach over several days in the joints or muscles, then cauterize them all around with the help of instruments.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And you do not evacuate the patient of good regimen and reception of medicines, for if a good regimen is followed and phlegm is evacuated with this cautery, he will be healed, God helping.
Capitol .xlv.	Capitol .xlv.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	Of cautery for fractures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When there is inflammation in the knees and pushing of the intestines before the hernia at the genital area, and this begins to happen nearby, then you must order the patient to leave their food for that day and use lenient causes so that the swelling descends from their abdomen.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	Then follow the patient with your hands on their back, and command them to keep their belly inside so that nothing is ejected or the hernia or intestines appear.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	Then return and with your tied fingers, test the rupture over the bone of the pelvis, marking the end which resembles half a circle at the upper parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then prepare the cautery, which has the following form:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	until it becomes red-hot and gives off sparks.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their chest, and another on their feet, who holds their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And then place the cautery over that mark with your hand holding the cautery straight, and insert it until you reach the bone of the heel within the middle of the wound; and repeat with that another time if you have not succeeded in reaching the bone on the first attempt.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And carefully observe the condition of the intestine during your cautery, so that you do not burn the intestine, which could result in the death of the patient or another serious harm.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your operation is not successful.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And it is necessary that the cautery for children be subtle according to their size and proportion.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And then care for the site of the cautery for three days with ointment until the burn scar is healed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that area with other ointments until it is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient should lie on their back for forty days until the site and the wound are fully sealed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And it is necessary to reduce the patient's nutrition according to the length of their treatment time, which shrinks their stomach, and ensures that the intestine does not come out due to the effort of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And then when it is time to lift [the patient] after about forty days, administer a properly prepared medicine, and keep the patient on that for another forty days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And let them be reduced in labor and the abundance of food and drink, and loud voices, for when they use this regimen of complete healing, they will be healed.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And I will describe the treatment of ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and at the beginning, if they do not want to suture it, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size, and let what is protruding from the wound be about one-third of it; then treat it as we have said, and do not adjust [or reduce] it.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And some of the earlier [authors] have said that a rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery in this manner, since it is marked out with a probe:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And a line is placed horizontally at the highest part of the rupture on the side, and another line above it; then place your hand with a nail-shaped cautery, but the first cautery should be lighter and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Capitol .xlvi.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	From the cautery of sprain.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain occurs in the upper limbs due to a blow or percussion and that pain persists for a long time and does not improve with any form of treatment using medicines, then you must cauterize with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the cautery should be applied to the entire limb according to its size and smallness, strength and weakness, and the location of the twist and pain.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Therefore, if it is healed by the first cautery, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery on it; for customarily such pains require punctures from one limb to another that approaches the area of pain, so you must continue with the cautery until the patient is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	On the cauterization of leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Some lepers see great improvement with the use of cautery, especially if the type of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of blood and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And when you want to cauterize the patient, consider if the leprosy is common and can be cured as we have said in the division [of the text], and do not delay. If you fear that the corruption will spread throughout the patient’s body and all of their constitution, then cauterize them on the head with five cauteries: one at the middle of the head, a second slightly below it towards the forehead at the end of the hairline; two on both temples; and one behind, on the nape or neck.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And place your hand with the cautery slightly inside to press on the bone a little pressure, and from there displace the scales, so that the expiration of large vapors is alleviated in him; and cauterize on the swelling as necessary.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if leprosy has already spread over the patient and appears manifestly, then you must cauterize those areas with the cauteries we have mentioned above; and with a cautery on the tip of the nose, and with two cauteries on both cheeks, and with two cauteries on two vertebrae of the neck, and with six cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and with one large cautery on the vertebrae near the hip, and one on the ribs, and with two on the knees, and with one on each knee, and with two on the elbows, and one on each elbow, and with two on the shoulders, and with two on the muscles, and with two on the tendons of his foot; and cauterize those areas over all the joints of his fingers and toes, and over each heel of his feet, and over the nails of his hands.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And be careful of the nerves that are on the heel so you do not burn those.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And sometimes it is cauterized with one cautery on the bone of the penis and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more you apply cauteries, the more beneficial and effective it is; and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery, just as they do not feel it on their clothes, because their body is already numb.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And it is necessary that the cauteries be large or few according to the members and joints, depending on what is preceded by the specifications of the instruments. 
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the cautery with flour of crushed garlic mixed with honey and apply other treatments until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	It seems like you've provided a section marker or chapter title without any text to translate. If you have a specific sentence or passage from this section that you would like translated, please provide it and I will be happy to help!
De cauterizacio de stupor.	It appears you've provided a title or heading in an archaic language similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Based on the context, this likely means:
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When any limb is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, but it does not heal, then you should cauterize that numbed limb with cauteries according to the size of the limb or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let your cautery enter the incision of the cord a little.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then treat that area with ointment until it is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And sometimes a stupor (numbness) that affects the hands and feet, and the vertebrae of the back, is cauterized to address the flow of nerves which affect that limb, and the stupor is thus alleviated.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	But do not attempt this unless you are knowledgeable in the anatomy of the limbs and the distribution of nerves throughout the moving body.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLIX.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On the cauterization of ulcers that are malignant.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When an ulcer is old and does not respond to any of the medicinal ointments, then you should cauterize that area with a cautery slightly more according to the amount of the thickness of the skin until the whiteness and color of it are reduced, and its color changes.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that by using flour of ashes and lentils with rubbed oil and with leaves of arnica, and with the blood of a dove or with the blood of a thrush, from each one is a part and all are mixed together, and then apply it on a cloth and place it over the area until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	It seems like you've provided a section marker or heading, "Capitul .l." (which might be intended as "Chapter I" or "Chapter 1"), but without additional text to work with, there isn't content to translate or explain further. If you have more text from this chapter that needs translation or interpretation, please provide it!
De cauterizacio de cranc.	This line appears to be the title or heading of a section in an ancient medical text. Here is the translation into English:
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer begins and you wish to remove it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery around its circumference just as it appears.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise say that it should be cauterized with the latter cautery in the middle of the area; but I have not seen this, for I fear that it might become ulcerated, and I have indeed seen this happen several times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is better that it be cauterized around its circumference with a circular cautery as we have said, or with multiple cauteries.
Capitol .li.	Chapter II.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	On the cauterization of hernias.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When some hernia is delayed in maturation, and this is due to an excess of moisture or the condition of the patient, who is old and frail, with little blood, or due to time, and you wish to hasten the maturation of the hernia; then cauterize around its circumference with small pointed cauteries; and afterwards leave it so that it may hasten in maturation.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	And if you want the perforation with a cautery, then ignite the cautery which has this shape: and place it in the middle of the area to be treated so that it penetrates the tendon.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery in that place where it is placed alleviates the body of the arm; then take care of it until it heals.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter II.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	On the cautery of corrosives.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrosive is a wandering corruption in the limb, which corrodes it as fire consumes dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you find that the corrosive is in a place that can withstand cautery with fire, then ignite several small, and large enough, claw-shaped cauters according to what is appropriate for the location of the corrosion.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then cauterize it thoroughly until you eradicate all the corrosion and leave no cause of it remaining.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And then leave it for three days, and place over the cauterized areas a dressing made with oiled cloth until all the scabs are removed and all the corruption is eradicated.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And then treat that with flesh-generating ointments.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	And if within three days the flesh does not grow healthy and there is no corruption, that is good; but if not, then apply the cautery again over the areas that are corrupted.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And corrosive treatment is sometimes done with sharp medicine, for that serves as a substitute for cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, cauterization with fire is a quicker remedy.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already mentioned the treatment with sharp medicine in the division, and thus use that when you have urgency.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter LIII.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On the cauterization of claws and other similar parts.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Often found in the affected areas of the foot, which is called a claw, and it is a significant condition, an ulcer that distorts the foot; and cautery on these is done in two ways, namely cautery with fire and cautery with hot water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then place that heated cautery on the shoulder, and then rotate your hand with the cautery around the shoulder until the cautery reaches the depth of the shoulder.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And leave that for three days until it begins to sweat out through the arm. 
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And then apply a plaster made with crushed wild mallows mixed with salt, and leave the plaster on that area for one night, because it will root out its foundations.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with an ointment made from generative flesh until it is healed. 
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it does not convert and often appears on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, then you must administer these cauteries with water. You should take a quill made of horn or iron or from the wing of an eagle, and place that over the claw; then pour a small quantity of warm water into the quill, and hold it with your hand, rotating it around with the compression of your hand all around, pressing the edge of the tube against the nail bed. The warm water will reach the root of the nail through this method; let the patient endure the sting of the warm water for an hour, and then remove it, as the claw with its roots will be eradicated.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And in this way, they do it by placing one next to the other until they cover all of those which are on the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And then treat those abscesses where the roots of the claws have been eradicated with those ointments which cause the flesh to regenerate.
Capitol .liiii.	It seems like you've provided a section or chapter marker, specifically "Capitul .liii." (Chapter LIV, which stands for 54 in Roman numerals). This indicates the start of Chapter 54 in a document, likely an old text given the style. If there is specific content from this chapter that needs translation or explanation, please provide it, and I would be happy to assist further!
De cauterizacio de tremor.	This phrase "De cauterizacio de tremor" translates to English as:
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When there is a tremor due to cold in the nerves or from a cold fever, or for another similar cause, then you must cauterize that area with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of the back, placing one cautery between each vertebra; and apply a cautery on their feet, and above their stomach, using an olive-shaped cautery.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the trembling of the patient is calmed and hastens the healing of the cold disease.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter V.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	On the cauterization of various accidents to the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When in the body there are blisters and ruptured pustules which are formed from thick corrupted matter; therefore, at the beginning when they appear, it is necessary to cauterize over each head of the fistula with a fine cautery using myrtle twigs whose end is extended with fire; or with long ash twigs; or with a lentil-shaped cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And sometimes the cautery is also applied at the beginning of its expulsion in this manner; and they are not believed to be cured until the excess is disrupted by doing these things, and they are healed through them.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	But however it must be done near evacuation with phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Capitol lvi.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Of cautery for accidental blood flow due to artery incision.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Watchful troops should divert the blood flow that results from an artery being cut, which can cause inflammation or lead to the formation of abscesses or cautery on the limb, and similar conditions, making it difficult to remain there. 
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore, when this happens to someone, then you press with your hand on the artery's opening, and place your finger there to firmly pinch it so that the flow of blood stops while keeping your finger in that position.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then place in the fire the small and large olive-shaped cauteries, in great number, and blow on them until they are all red-hot.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take one of those, either small or large depending on the location and the wound where the artery is ruptured, over that vein that you have carefully cleaned with your finger, and hold the cautery until it is applied and constricts the blood flow.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you move your finger and remove the cautery, then take another appropriately sized cautery from those which are prepared in the fire, and continue to apply them one after another until the bleeding is stopped.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And be careful not to burn the nerves that are there, and ensure that no other harm comes to the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to stop the bleeding in any other way except by four methods: either by using a cautery as we have mentioned, or by extraction if it cannot be extracted, for when extracted, the ends of the fibers are burned and the blood flow is stopped, or by binding with a strong ligature or bandage, or by placing medicines on it that have the property to stop the bleeding; and they should be bound tightly with a pad under moderate compression.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	And he who administers a moderate restriction on him with bandages and with tightness using cloths or by positioning burning and similar causes, does not provide comfort but rather pain.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	If this condition affects someone and the doctor is not present nor medicine available, then open with a gentle pressing of the index finger on that vein as we have said, and understand the great constriction inside so that the blood remains from the most superior part of the wound; and over the artery do not remove your finger; and above the artery sprinkle cold water of great chilliness until the blood is congealed and thickened; and also consider whether there is a need for cautery or medicine.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begin the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	About incision and perforation and bloodletting and phlebotomy and wounds and their similarities.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter about all diseases in which cautery with fire is appropriate and with combustible medicine, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for them along with the forms of the cauterizations; and I have ordered the chapters from the highest part of the head down to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And I will proceed in this chapter in the same manner, so that the seeker of this information may be relieved regarding what they have asked about.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before I begin this, son, you must learn that in this chapter is feared what is in the first chapter on cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And for this reason great caution must be taken, because in the operation described in this chapter many times there is evacuation of blood which holds life, whether by sprinkling from the vein or cutting into the abscess or opening for extraction or purging of the plague or extraction of an arrow or incision of stone and similar procedures.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And accompanying all of these [symptoms] is fear and trembling, and in most cases, it leads to death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that this should not happen to you in which there is danger, for sometimes your ways as a person can be mixed with the ways of diseases. 
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And of them, there are some who will go with their sickness and it is light, but you should consider death for him, because of the intensity of what he finds in his illness, and due to the length of his sickness, and with the illness comes fear which signifies death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And among them is the one who gives you his possessions and says [you will be healed], hoping for healing from that person, while their illness is perilous.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore you should not consent to what comes to you in this manner; and your caution should be greater than desire and greed; and do not assume any reason for this except certain knowledge that confirms what you must do, and which leads to praiseworthy outcomes.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use this in the treatment of all your illnesses for prognosis and indication of health restoration, because in that lies help to you in acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	O, children, may God inspire His understanding in you and not remove direction and protection from you, for that is in His hands.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have ordered this chapter distinctly by sections following the chapter on cautery, and the treatment from head to foot, so that what you seek and need may be made easier for you.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	On the treatment of water that is contained in the head of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this illness often occurs due to childbirth and when the wet nurse tightens the child's head with violence.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And sometimes for hidden reasons which are not known.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	And I have only seen this disease in children; and in all those whom I have seen, death was sudden, and thus to me it appears as a work left undone in them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and the head of the child was so enlarged that he could not bear it due to the size of his head, and the humidity increased until it caused death.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this humidity is either added between the skin and the bone, or it accumulates beneath the bone on the spine.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	For the operation on that area where the humidity is between the skin and the bone, and if the swelling is small, then you should split open the middle of the head with a cut横向的切割应该翻译为在长度上，但根据上下文，这里可能是指在宽度上进行切割。因此，更准确的翻译可能是：
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And therefore, if the humidity is increased more and the abscess becomes larger, then there are here two incisions according to this method:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the humidity is near the bone, a sign of it is that you see the corners of the head open on all sides and water is squeezed out when you press that area with your hand from inside, and this was not hidden from you. 
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	You must cut in the middle of the head with three incisions according to this method:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And then extract all the moisture through the incision; and then secure the incisions with bandages and poultices; and then fumigate it from above with wine and oil until the fifth day, and then remove the dressing and treat the wound with lint and ointments, and bind the head evenly; and feed the patient with dry food of little moisture until the member is strengthened and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another method of incision, which you should consider based on the magnitude of the abscess and the collection of water, for sometimes it is more pronounced in the occipital area, or in the frontal part, or on the right side, or on the left side; and thus pay attention with the incision where the abscess and the accumulation of water appear, and do this according to what is best possible for you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And be careful not to cut the artery, which could cause bleeding and lead to the patient's death due to that blood flow and evacuation of moisture.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter II.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	From the incision of the arteries that are near the ears, called helixes.
Capitol segon.	Second chapter.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When catarrh or rheumatism occurs in the joints or feet, and it is chronic, and you do not find healing through medications, then the final remedy for this involves starting from those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And therefore, when you want to incise those areas where the patient has hair on their head, then rub the area with a coarse cloth so that the arteries appear, and then tightly bind the neck of the patient with some cloth; then identify where the vein pulses; and place the spots of each near the points close to the ears, which are concealed in some men.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then press on the artery with your thumb, and then incise each one with a sharp spatula, penetrating inside the bone, and do this along the length of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you want, insert the spatula under the artery and break it at the points above the incisions.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And the length of the incision should be about two fingers' width, for when any vein is incised, the blood flows out with a pulsating discharge, which escapes frequently in bursts.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	And if the artery does not appear at the incision site, then you must measure from the earlobe a distance of three fingers, and then mark with a needle, and proceed to enter the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And the amount of blood that should be let is an ounce of wine, and strongly it does not bleed more or less from him, and all this depends on the quantity which appears due to the strength of the patient and the fullness of their artery.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then consider the wound, and if any cause of swelling remains on the bone, then cut away that part so it does not become an abscess.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen the wound with poultices and linen bandages, and then treat it with ointments until it heals.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	On the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When someone suffers from chronic migraines or sharp pains due to moisture and qualities in the veins of the temples, or if these are severe and similar to those, and treatment with medical methods does not help, then we resort to extracting the arteries in the temples or cauterizing them as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the method of the operation and extraction is that the patient should shave the hairs on their temples; and locate the visible artery in the temple where it is shown to you by its pulse, as it is hidden in most people due to thick hair.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden from you, then the patient's neck should be stretched with some cloth; and then rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with warm water until the artery appears clearly to you.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And now take the spatula, which has the following form:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you incise the vein with ease until you reach the artery; and then insert and extract it in such a way that you remove it from the vein and expose it from the tunics that cover it, on all sides.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the artery is thin, then wrap it with the tip of a needle, and then cut a part of it according to the extent to which its ends are stretched or contracted, and there will be no flow of blood, because if they are not cut, the blood will not flow out completely.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then evacuate one to three uncii of blood.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, then you must tie it in two places with a strong double thread of linen or with long cords, and do not allow putrefaction before the wound heals and the flow of blood stops.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then cut away the excess that is between two ligaments; and do this at that time or another appropriate time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you want, cauterize that area with a cautery between the bone using a knife-shaped cautery before cutting off the ends of it, and let it remain in place for the same procedure.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better to perform the procedure when the patient does not have fever or a heated constitution; for cautery is one of those causes that helps dispel harmful moisture, and thus it is better in treatment.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And before the extraction of the arteries, fill the area with an old plug, and place it over the wound properly dressed, then treat it with drying medicines to promote flesh growth and with bandages until it is healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while you are working another flow of blood comes from the artery, then you must take care to stop that bleeding, either by using a cautery or by filling the area with a plug, and hold your hand until the bleeding is stopped.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if none of those causes are present to you, then place your finger on the spot where the blood has coagulated, and sprinkle the area with water of vehement coldness until the sharp pain subsides, and be strong according to what is needed.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And what is lighter in the extraction of an artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two blades, since you have marked the two spots with a probe, and then place them, ignite them, until they reach the bone and divide the vein into two places, so that what is between the ends of it is elongated, because they are not fully consolidated by this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And let the sharpness of the two blades be similar.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, if the sharpness of the two blades is less, it is better, because if they are as sharp as two blades close to each other, they will not cut the flesh too quickly.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, since there is some thickness in them, the heat of the fire is retained in them, and the flesh is cut lightly.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better than all other works and lighter. 
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And let the space that is between two ribs be the quantity of the thickness of a finger.
Capitol quart.	Chapter four.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	On the treatment of acute and acidic tear conditions of the eyes.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When those tears are acidic, and it is the condition of the veins that lie above the forehead which have become inflamed, and if you do not find any other cause for medical treatment, sometimes the face of the patient turns red, and they feel a crawling sensation on their forehead as if ants were crawling, and their eyes become weakened to such an extent that the eyelashes are known to be affected, and the eyelids are irritated by the acidity of the tears. The ancient bitter mixtures were used in the treatment of such conditions, and I do not name this treatment without reason.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And you command the patient to shave the hairs that are on their forehead, and then make three incisions equally spaced along the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the incision is about two fingers: the first incision should be equally distant at the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, the second according to the length a little beyond the movement of the tear ducts which are in the lacrimal area, and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And be careful of the beginning of the arteries which are on two sides, and extend your hand from the continuation of both jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space between each incision is the quantity of three fingers put together.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a piece of sponge prepared or dry cloths with which you dry the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then insert the spatula with two sharp ends, of which this is the form of the incision:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	The sentence "que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio" can be translated into English as follows:
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then stretch this spatula and insert into the first incision another instrument which is called a scalpel, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And place the sharp side of that instrument against the adjacent flesh and the tendon, and the other side towards the bone, and push it in until it reaches the middle fissure, and with that cut all the vessels descending from the head to the heels.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	And continue the incision to this part of the tendon, and then do that in the middle fissure between another fissure.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And when an equal amount of blood flows out, squeeze the areas where clotted blood is present.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then place in each fissure some old goat hair, and put on those areas a powder mixed with wine and oil and sour wine, and ensure that no harmful swelling occurs.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day, remove the bandage and administer a large infusion of warm or tepid water, and then treat it with a basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil and other ingredients until the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	Capitol .v.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	For the given line:
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When there is a sharp and continuous discharge coming from some veins, and sometimes the patient's eyes are slightly weakened, and their vision has become weak, and their eyelids are ulcerated and lose their hair, and in the forehead area there is an acute pain followed by sneezing, then you should know through these symptoms that the discharges do not come but from small veins inside the body.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best treatment for this is as follows: command the patient to shave their forehead, and then make an incision in that area at the midpoint of the forehead, a small one in width (and begin the incision from the left temple towards the right temple; the incision should be through the bone; extend your hand beyond the swollen temples which are affected by chewing), until the bone is exposed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry all the blood with a sponge or a dry cloth, and then pack between the two edges of the incision with old wool or cloths.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then apply a powder mixed with wine and oil on top to prevent an inflammatory swelling from forming.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you loosen that and see that the abscess has already decreased, then it is necessary to massage the area where new flesh begins to grow, and subsequently treat it with a drying regimen which will cause new flesh to grow, just as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix them, and from these make a plaster and apply it to these areas for the growth of new flesh.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	For the given line:
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	Every cause that affects the ears is of four types: either it is mineral stone or something similar to stone, such as iron and glass, or it is from plants, such as beans or peas, or it is due to fluid causes, such as water and sour wine and things similar to them, or some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And thus when a stone enters the ear or another similar cause from those that do not fit or grow in the ear, and expose the ear to sunlight, and if you find the stone, then distill some substance like violet oil or sizami, and then administer its extract, and induce sneezing with conditions, and plug the nostrils before the act of sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	Then place some pieces of cloth or wool around the ear's rim, and extend the ear towards the affected areas, for small particles often get stuck due to these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not stuck, then administer the extract using an instrument called the gesti epicicarios subtil, which has the following form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is deeply stuck and can be removed with the instrument, that is good; otherwise, administer the extract using a fine needle of double duplication.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And therefore, if it is not blocked by that, then make a tube of iron and insert the end of the tube into the ear canal and seal around the tube with wax and softened oil so that nothing is open except the tube.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then extract with your wind with strong suction, for such troops of things as we have recounted.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	If it is not treated in this manner, then take some alum or a vessel that has been used to hold birds for a small amount of time, and place that at the end of the ray, and then wrap it properly over that area.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert that into the ear canal easily, and then dry the ear of its moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And therefore, if it is not cured by all the causes which we have recounted, then you should consider cutting it before it becomes an abscess or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the method of cutting it is that you first bleed the patient from the saphenous vein and extract blood according to the virtue of their constitution, then make a cut between your fingers and turn the ear upwards, and finally make a small incision at the root of the ear and remove the pus from the deeply pressed area.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And let the incision be of a crescent shape until you reach the stone, and once the stone is found, remove it if you can with appropriate instruments; then close the incision quickly at that time, and care for it until it is healed.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause in the ear is one of the growths that have grown and become inflamed, then administer its treatment and extraction; but if it does not respond to you by coming out, then take a thin, subtle spatula according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	And administer with that the extraction of the wax which has been poured into the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not perform this when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor from the ear. Place it in small pieces, and then extract them using your fingers or with subtle movements, or through incision as we have said, for this makes the extraction easier.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	However, when water has entered the ear, the patient should use sneezing at the beginning with certain conditions, and fill their ear with some old cloth, and lie down on the side where the water is. If it is thus expelled, that is good; if not, then take small, thin pebbles about the length of a finger, heat them slightly over fire, and have the patient insert one of these into the canal of their ear, jumping up from that side and striking another stone against the one inside the ear to induce percussion.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Do not stop this procedure with the stone until all the water has been expelled from the ear.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And already the water should be poured into something like paper or a reed, and put one end of it in the ear and extend the other end with fire until its middle is burnt.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And then place another syringe and do this as many times until all the water is extracted, and suck that with a cannula in the same way as mentioned above for the stone extractor.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	In the extraction of an object entering into that ear, if it is small and similar in appearance, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is large and causes pain deep within the eardrum, then administer its removal with gentle manipulations and compressions, for the cause is lighter than all other causes that occur in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	However, in the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, when you treat it with what we have said in the division and in the tract on distillations and your treatment does not succeed, then you must examine the ear in the sunlight.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then if any cause of the worms appears, extract it gently or with subtle compressions; but if no cause appears, then take a cannula that is narrow at one end and wide at the other, which should have the following form:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the delicate extremity into the ear according to the amount that the patient can tolerate; then suck out with force using that [extremity], and do this several times until all the worms are expelled.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	And if you do not obey the instruction, then plug and seal the cannula circuit with wax as we have said; then administer distillates which have already been proven in the treatment of worms, and you will find this in the treatise on distillates.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let your effusion be with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear using this instrument, which has the following form:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make it of silver or bronze, leaving it straight, with a small tube in it, and a plate on top.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And thus it should be designed to fit into the opening of the cannula container where it will be necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you want, take the rod and wrap the end of it properly with a cloth, then pour oil into the concavity of the ear or juice from some herb, or whichever of these medicines you choose into the cannula — which is in the ear — then insert the rod with the cloth on top and press it gently with your hand until the oil is expelled into the concavity of the ear and the patient feels the oil inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And that which is inserted into the ear should already be slightly warmed with fire.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And be careful that the substance you will distill into the ear is not too cold, for medicines for the ear do not tolerate that.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the treatment of ear obstruction.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Sometimes, some children are born from mothers with unruptured membranes, and this can also happen to adults, where the ear canal is obstructed by plaque or flesh growing in that area; and this obstruction sometimes occurs at the entrance of the ear canal without touching the eardrum, and sometimes it affects the outer parts.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which occurs at the entrance of the ear canal, without affecting the eardrum, is often in a more difficult condition to heal.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in cases where the eardrum is involved, you must expose the patient's ear to the sun and examine it closely.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And therefore, if swelling appears, open it with a fine scalpel which has this form:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the extremity of it in which the width is small, of which one part is sharp and the other is not; and the spatula should be on two sides so that it does not injure the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And therefore if the obstruction is due to flesh grown in the ear or on it, then take that with subtle needles and incise that very easily so that all the flesh may be removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if there is an obstruction in the ear canal, then take fine wool and warm it slightly with fire, and then place it in the ear canal.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And therefore, if you find that the patient breathes easily with this method due to the gravity of exhaling, alleviate the oppression on them easily; and be careful not to harm the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then place in the ear a piece of cloth the size of the width of the tube that you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or take some wax, dip it in warm water and sprinkle ground powder over it and use it; and if you find the ear to be abscessed, then you must remove the wax and replace it with other wax that you will wrap in cerot made with rose oil until the abscess begins to soften; and then treat it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	And if bleeding occurs, then soak a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use another treatment that restrains the flow of blood, which is described in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	The text appears to be in an archaic or medieval form of a Romance language, possibly Old French or a similar dialect. Here's the translation for the given line:
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	Of the treatment for athelisz, which affects the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Attaching the conditions that sometimes lead to moisture around the eyelids of the eyes, and at other times are dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore, you must hold those with tweezers or in an ounce, and cut them with a sharp instrument from their roots, and then place your hands over the trimmed areas.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	And if pain with a flow of blood occurs, then you cauterize those areas with a subtle lens-shaped cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cautery is applied near the incisions and observed returns when any cause of the hemorrhages remains; and when they are cauterized with fire, those hemorrhages are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment for swelling that occurs in the eyelids of the eyes.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Spots are often seen in the eyelids of the eyes, which have a cause that resembles swelling in its strength and hardness, and thus the swelling is called by this name.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an accumulation of thick moisture on the eyelid beneath and above.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the operation for it is to consider whether the swelling is developing in such a way that it appears from the eyelid and is bad throughout; and the cause of it is slight.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore, make an incision over it along its width, and then squeeze it throughout with ease until it dries out, and then suspend it with a bandage and cut it off.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	But if you are not prepared at the start of the surgery and have to penetrate the eyelid little by little with an incision, then this should cause no concern. 
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the wound is large, then you should close it with stitches; and take care of what is inside so that it heals.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is minor, you will not suffer harm from that which the warmth of it restores and reincarnates.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the swelling is declining towards the inside of the eyelid, you should expose the inner surface, suspend the swelling with your thumb, starting from where it begins to swell, and press all around it; and if the eyelid at the start is elongated, this does not matter in any way.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	Then at the beginning, wash the wound with salt water; and treat the area with something that promotes healing until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter .10.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	From the treatment around the upper eyelid.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Almost always it is grey matter that is generated in the tunics of the upper eyelid, and particularly among children, it aggravates their eyes and affects their sight greatly; and they cannot look at the brightness of the sun because tears collect for them due to this.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And thus you find them lying on their faces all the time, and they sleep on their faces; and so at the eyelids of their eyes, the eyebrows are moist, which have already been covered by swelling, and an appearance of cataract is evident in the eye; and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel a cataract inside them.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And one method of the operation is such that the patient places his head on your lap, and then you place a cloth over him and make it hot, and make a circle according to the amount which contains arthernach from all sides, and then place that over this and press with your fingers all around so that arthernach is gathered in the middle of the circle, and then create moisture in the middle of that using a spatula inserted along the width, and the incision should not be larger than the one made in flaubotomy.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Therefore, extract it with cloths with which you have wrapped between the fingers mentioned at the outer parts and roll between the right and left hand until it is dispersed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be careful not to place yourself in the fissure so that with the spatula you do not reach too deep and disturb it.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence, line by line:
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And so some use salt and place it in the cavity of the裂开处，以便去除那种湿气。
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that which needs to be healed within.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	And if you encounter an abscess in the area, then treat it with soft plasters until it heals.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	On methods of applying heat to the body.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When thick hairs grow on the eyelids, different from natural hairs and are old, these annoy the eye and cause various illnesses such as constant tearing and softening of the eyelids and film, which can lead to the destruction of the eye called "tactinir" of the eye. It is treated in four ways: by cauterization with fire; by sharp medicine as previously mentioned in the chapter on cauterization; by atactini through incision and suturing; or by using tubes as I will explain.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	Therefore, you must place the head of the patient in your lap; then turn the eyelid with your left hand. If it turns easily, that is good; if not, insert a needle into the part where there is pus under the eyelid, and let the needle penetrate upwards with the thread close to the margin of the eyelid where the hairs grow, near the hairs, and pull the thread towards the upper parts with the eyelid, turning it over.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then introduce the instrument inside the eyelid, placing the hairs tightly with a spatula from the larger lacrimal duct into the smaller one; and then extract the pus and cover the eyelid with fine dust of cotton or cloth, and then sew over the eyelid with thread, and thus it should be as depicted in the figure of a myrtle leaf.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, the figure should be according to the amount of elevation of the eyelid, for this varies among individuals, because some require a significant incision in the upper eyelid depending on how much the eyelid has been loosened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then insert with the spatula along the two lines that you have marked, starting from the larger lacrimal duct into the smaller one.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your incision is near the natural hairs, it should be as thick as that of the king's [presumably meaning it should be of significant thickness or importance].
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then place the needle at one of the two angles of the wound, and then scrape that entire area clean, and then suture the two edges together with a thread or fine woolen yarn, and wipe away the blood, and if you wish to do so, attach any excess pus to both eyebrows using sticky substances, but if not, disregard this step.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And then loosen the suture of the wounds between three or four days, and then treat it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, leave the wound unsutured, and treat it with something that dries and constricts, for the eyelid being raised requires the sealing of the wound and the addition of thread; however, suturing is better. Therefore, this is what the ancients taught regarding treatment.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	However, one must be careful with the patient, and it is of good practice, and there should be no fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another method in surgery, which involves shaping the eyelid like a myrtle leaf, and then lifting the eyelid with three separate and gathered threads according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	However, if that is not possible, hold the threads, and since it is not equal, take a needle with thread and insert it into the middle of the shape, and place another thread near the larger lacrimal duct, and the second thread near the smaller lacrimal duct, and adjust the threads between these points equally, and then lift your hand with an equal elevation, lifting the entire chain that has been shaped as we have described.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then bring together the two edges of the wound with stitches, and care for it so that it may heal.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	And if an abscess occurs in your incision or your wound, drain that abscess with wax and the like, and with unguents.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And sometimes you may encounter an eyelid where the hairs are inverted; then you should use what we have mentioned about incision; however, stitching is more intricate in such cases.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	To anesthetize with reeds follows this method:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	and it is that you turn the eyelid inside out and split the structure within as I have described; then make two reeds or two fine splints whose length should be according to the length of the eyelid and their width should be half the width of the spatula.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already made incisions at the ends of each section where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then carefully apply each [reed or splint] over the part of the eyelid that is excess from the eye, and secure the reeds of each section with a strong binding, and leave it like this for several days, because the constrained area will die off and dry up and will fall off on its own.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	And if it is delayed, then break through with the saw at the bones, and then treat the wound until it heals.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	When it is secured, the eyelid is lifted and the hairs do not poke.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the form of two canes which you will make according to this shape:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and there should be the quantity of the length and the width neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	On the removal of hard, piercing hairs from the nose using a needle.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When there are unnatural, hard, rough, and piercing hairs in the nose, the procedure is that you take a fine needle and place it in some fine wool or linen, and then carefully adjust the ends of the needle and hold them gently but precisely.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And the length of the wool or linen should be about the quantity of one palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then you apply another subtle ointment over it briefly, and bind the extremities of that if you so desire.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then place the patient's head on your lap, and be close to the sunlight so that your work may be clearly seen, for this is a subtle and delicate operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then insert the needle into the root of the hair that requires treatment, and make it penetrate quickly into the eyelid before removing it from the natural hair. 
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull the hair upwards and insert it into the slit, and let the hairs be one or two or three but not more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand with that inside so that the hair is removed by pulling it out through the eyelid with the natural hair. 
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	If it is necessary to draw out the poison and the hair is not removed from the area, you should apply the poultice made with that powder to the affected parts so that the poison can be drawn out of the wound effectively.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And look at it with the vision of the wound, because when you situate the patient and the faithful one, and all shout and clean the wound, and leave the clamps for two or three days, until the hair adheres to its place and new good flesh grows over it.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the hair is shorter, then you adjust a long hair from the natural hairs, and lift it with that, or leave it inside so that it stretches somewhat in space, and then you lift it.
Capitol .xiii.	Capitol .xiii.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	From the treatment of inflammation that comes upon the upper eyelid.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When inflammation comes in the eye, and it is a contraction of the eyelid when it contracts upwards, to the right or left side, due to poor healing of wounds or burns or cautery, and it is called leporine, and this condition can be either natural or accidental, and it is caused by the healing of wounds, burns, or cautery, or resembles such ailments.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The method of the operation is that you cut through that scar tissue and separate its lips, and place in it, where those are separated, a piece of linen cloth, and tie them until they heal.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And it is not necessary for you to treat it with methods that dry out and constrict; because if you do so, the inflammation will return worse than it was at any time before.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use those that soften it, such as fenugreek, and fumigate with water in which their ashes and seeds are mixed, or an ointment of daisy, which should be liquefied with some oils, and soak the cloth in that, and treat it with that.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your cure is that you should pierce with any instrument that is not solid according to the form that ignites at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation which we have spoken of is nothing more than some correction of a hernia that does not return to the form of the place as it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Of the treatment for ectropion which occurs in the eyelid. 
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This inflammation which occurs in the eyelid is properly called an sty; and it can be either naturally occurring or accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	And an accident is caused by a blow or by cutting or by cautery or by other similar means.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the method of the operation is that you take a needle with double thread, and insert it into the flesh, making it pass from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then extend the flesh at the points above with the needle and pierce it with the needle, and incise with a broad spatula.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And then return the shape of the eyelid as needed; if not, take the reed and place it in the cut shape, and with that turn the eyelid, and create the two slits on the side of the eyelid accordingly.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And let the ends of the two slits be at two angles of the incision that you have made where they converge, and form an angle between them so that when they come together, a figure is formed by them.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is the Greek letter: lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then remove the flesh in the amount that is the width of the sharp object left behind, which is the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then align the separated parts and sew them together with wool thread; and then treat them with what we have said about the mollifying medicines and the poultices until they heal.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if you need to operate by incision or suture or cautery, then you must make a flat incision on the skin of the eyelid as described.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	Then separate with the poultice between the two lips as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In summary, for the treatment of an operation when it is above or below, as it occurs in the surgery, according to the preparation method of the operation, and that is in the form of various particles. 
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the skilled artisan always prepares in every possible way to restore the figure to its natural form, or close to it, and that patient according to what is most advantageous for him concerning the operation and the instruments in the best conditions.
Capitol .xv.	Capitol .xv.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation occurs in many individuals where the upper eyelid is adhered to the white part of the eye, and it restricts its natural movement and functions, you must intervene by inserting the tip of a spatula under the eyelid, lifting or stretching it out with tweezers.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	Then you cut through the adhesion with a fine spatula, which should not be sharp at the tip of the incision, keeping it slightly blunt so that the patient is not disturbed during the operation, and ensure the spatula does not scratch the eye with its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And may your incision carefully separate the adhesion so that the eyelid returns to its natural form and the entire adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	Then you put salty water in the eye with which you wash it; or distill juniper dissolved in water onto it.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	Then separate the eyelid from the eye with goose fat, and place wool soaked in egg white over the eye; on the third day, use consolidating treatments until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Capitol .xvi.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	From the inflammation of the eyelid and the prominence of flesh from the lacrimal area. 
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both conditions do not begin except from the larger tear duct, within which it gradually covers the sight and prohibits light and movement of the eye.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence line by line:
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take a needle and insert into it a horsehair or ox hair or cow hair, or similar, or strong thread, or double the small end of the needle little by little and place that in the middle of the nail, and penetrate that with the needle, and bind the nail with thread; and extend that to the upper parts, and scrape with the hair the side of the nail which is the matrix.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And in this way you should proceed by placing the probe inside the patient's rear end. 
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then you incise the remaining part at the root of the lacrimal duct with a fine spatula or small scissors, and separate the flesh from the natural lacrimal to ensure that continuous flow of tears does not result from this incision.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the nail is extended with sulfur or with quicksilver, as we have said, and then it should be extracted with a lion-shaped spatula, which has this form: 
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And be careful that with the spatula you do not touch the corneal membrane and cause a rupture, and that the pupil is not pierced.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then introduce a small amount of finely ground salt or seasoned plaster into the eye and leave it there until the next day; then treat it with what is appropriate until it heals.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the nail is not flexible and you cannot insert the needle, nor can it be placed in that one-inch area, then this kind of nail issue is treated with medicines, and it is healed just as described and recommended in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to incise that area, then open the eye of the patient and take a fine spatula with an acute edge shaped like this:
am subtilitat.	with subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if you find that it is rarefied and confused and embedded in that area, then apply a distillation of your choice to the eye using seasoned plaster or roasted plaster or finely ground salt, and keep the eye covered until the next day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat the operation on that area until everything of it is removed, but rather let a counter-irritant cautery be in the wound, because when you leave that, treat at the beginning the inflammation until it is healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat your operation on that area until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The prominence of the lacrimal flesh, if noted in the wound causing great harm, should be suspended with a thread; and cut that part from it, but do not complete the incision so that you do not cut the tear ducts.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then drip into the lacrimal duct a strong and made mixture until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	On the incision of a boil and what is born from tight flesh in the wound.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Sometimes in the wounds of some individuals, hard flesh grows and covers the pupil, or approaches and presses closely upon the eyelids, binding them together from the outer parts and assembling like a rough barrier.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	Here is the translation line by line:
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And let your incision be with the scalpel that we have recommended in the section about the nail, or with small scissors with which ashcel is collected according to how it will come into form near this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Therefore, when your incision is completed and all that flesh has been removed, then fill the wound with finely ground salt or sprinkle on it red powder similar to corrosive medicinal powders, and place over the wound outside a piece of egg white until it is ensured against abscess formation.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if any cause for concern remains and there is an abundance of corrupted blood, and you fear that an abscess may form, then leave the wound open and treat that abscess with whatever will cure that abscess, and then repeat the operation until it is healed, and similarly do so in the flesh adjacent to where this kind of wound occurred.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	However, you must ensure that all healing of the wound proceeds either naturally or accidentally through the use of instruments, and do not put your hand into any of these operations until you see that the limb can sufficiently endure such an operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	On the collection of pus in the wound.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Pus comes from inflamed veins that are hardened over the wound and prevent proper healing, causing the wound to fester for a long time.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning that you consider whether the wound in which there is pus is strong and if there is no other illness besides the pus; then you should collect that pus.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And you command the patient to rest their head on your lap, and then suspend those veins with an ounce or two according to your judgment; and let that ounce be of subtle doubling in this manner:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	Or use two ounces gradually in one dose according to this method:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And then those veins should be tied with fine threads delicately, and cleanse the blood little by little until you see those veins cleared of dirt and turned clean.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And be careful that you do not lead the dirt with the edges of the spatula; and let your operation be in the middle of the day when the sun is up, and be firm in your operation so that you only incise those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed the procedure, then apply wormwood or rue to the dirt, because its sharpness will corrode what remains of the sediment.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	But if it is not possible for you to complete everything in that hour, then apply a plaster with something that reduces the pain, and leave it for several days until the pain is subdued and an abscess is prevented.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then apply the same method to the second area until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form of the scissors:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On the reduction of nasal fractures.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat fractures with cauterization or sharp, burning medicines as previously narrated and it is not healed, then do not generate heat in it, but make an incision over the abscess to allow its maturity, and extract all the moisture within it until the bone is exposed.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then when the bone is exposed and there is corruption or blackening in it, you scrape it with an instrument that has the following form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is called the rough head, and it is made of Indian iron, and its head is round like a sieve that is made pointed by filing or finely perforated (as shown in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place it on the corrupted part of the bone, then rotate it between your fingers, and press your hand little by little until you know that the corruption has been scraped away.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And this should be done several times, and then restore the area with drying and astringent causes.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Therefore, if the area is stabilized and good flesh has grown there and the body has been separated from the pus and it remains like this for forty days, and it is not renewed, and it does not become inflamed, and no accident occurs in it, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, then it is not about generating anything but rather reducing the fissure to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: you must expose the bone either with fire or with sharp medicine, and once the bone is exposed, then take a tool in accordance with this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The tip of the tool should be triangular, and the shaft should be gradually narrowed towards the tip in such a way.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	Then place that [tool] on the bone, near the lacrimal area; extend your hand a little from the nose, and then rotate your hand with the tool until it penetrates all of the bone. The patient will feel this because air will be forced out when you do this.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore, now restore the area with astringent and drying medicines as has been mentioned.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Here is the translation line by line:
Capitol .xx.	Capitol .xx.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	Of reducing the prominence of the wound.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the swelling appears entirely and you do not cause any harmful or diminishing effect in the vein, then you must purge the patient, and then follow up with it, and then apply cupping to the neck at the site of scarification and sucking properly; and then apply over the swelling an ointment which is made from acacia, aloe, honey, and tragacanth, and then strengthen the plaster on the swelling with fine powder.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the method of powders is that you take skins of mulled lions, and each skin be folded into four pieces; and make those powders.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then place those one over the other according to the amount that the wound requires.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And then bind those with a strong, tight cloth; and repeat the cupping with suction after scraping; and then remove the cups and leave the wound exposed day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if the bandage becomes loosened, then it must be tightened.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And then remove the bandage day and night as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the wound has already been reduced, it is good, and if not, then repeat the plaster with the powders and binding and cupping until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	On the incision of the uveal tunica prominence.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is disruption in the uveal tunica and it becomes prominent, protruding from the eyelids like a knot of raisin, and takes on a human-like form due to this, if you wish to incise this, the operation should be performed as follows: insert the needle at the base of the uvea from below upwards, then place another needle where the double thread is located near the lacrimal area, making sure it penetrates properly while keeping the first needle in its position; then incise the area of the double thread and lift the part of the uvea along the circumference of the needle with that thread and tighten it well.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then remove the needle and place over the wound wool soaked in egg white, and leave it until the thread falls with the grape.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then treat the wound with something that strengthens the interior so that the plague may be healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And sometimes, it gathers from all sides with a circle of cloth around the wound to form a large swelling, and then it should be pierced with a fine spatula to reach the core of the wound, allowing the whitish moisture to flow out, and the swelling will decrease immediately.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen the interior so that it may heal.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio de alconati.	On the treatment of hiccups.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This illness, which is called hiccup, is nothing but a spasm that occurs in the diaphragm, resembling descending water, and it is not exactly that.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The method of treating it is to have the patient sit upright on a prepared chair. Then take their head in both your hands and direct it towards the side where you see the spasm coming from, and then stop its descent and keep it still, and the patient will see the causes just as they appear.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not go down below, know that it is water. 
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	And if the descent of the pus has not been prepared as we have said, then place the patient between your hands and take a fine spatula and use it to separate the panniculus from the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corneal tunic at the crown (inside the socket), until the pus is thoroughly drained.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Therefore, when it is poulticed, then you should distill hot water in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have already boiled fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then it is treated with other methods until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the treatment of water (fluid) descending from the head.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already mentioned the types of water in the division and which ones are suitable for piercing with a needle, declaring that according to health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Now it is necessary that you place the patient between your hands on a chair and tie their head tightly with a binding agent.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	Then place your left hand near the eyelid of their eye if the affected eye is the left one; or use your right hand if the affected eye is the right one.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	Then with your right hand, take an almond if the eye is the left one; or with your left hand if the eye is the right one.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And then place the almond-shaped object near the crown due to the thickness of the ray in the white part of the eye next to the smaller tear duct, and then insert the almond with force and rotate your hand with it.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then penetrate into the white of the eye and feel that the ulcer has already reached it due to its condition.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And it is necessary that the measurement from the almond to the pupil be equal to the space from the pupil to the end of the black part, which is the crown of the eye; for you will see with that pupil through the clarity of the corneal layer.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	Then place your hand within the location where the water is, and then you pull it down once and then again, and thus if the water descends quickly, now look at the patient on which you should focus your sight immediately, and keep it in their view. 
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then rest for a while; if the water has descended, then you should pause again before any kind of liquid is poured.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And then when it is cut and does not descend, you should extract the liquid easily, and rotate your hand slowly inside. Then dissolve a little clear salt in water and wash the wound with that solution; then place a small piece of cloth or stopper or wool soaked in oiled rose and egg white over the wound and secure it there.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	But we and those of our time place on that wound some crushed comfrey mixed with egg white.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the liquid does not penetrate the wound due to its hardness—because there are some people whose wounds are very hard—then you must take the spatula named alberid, which has the following form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And then pierce that joint with it, but do not force your hand too much, and the goal is merely to create a fine opening for the liquid.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	Then introduce the liquid as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you should complete your work by preparing the patient's dark sleeping chamber where they sleep on their back in a completely motionless state.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And pause in the nature of the condition so that it aligns with its natural state, and do not move their head to the right or left side at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And let the dressing be according to its placement within the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then remove that from the dark mass and expose the affected sight, and show them some causes, and then reapply the dressing within the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And it is not necessary to do this during the hour of treatments or right before the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	However, it is necessary that you do this so that the water can gently permeate through with great and vigorous attention.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	But if an abscess forms and requires cauterization, then you must remove the dressing before the seventh day, and treat it with whatever method alleviates the abscess.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then you should clean the affected area and place a dressing over the face of the wound through which the movement of the affected part is regulated, leaving it in place for several days, while it remains in the dark mass.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And then it is laid down gently from that position and turned onto its side in its causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in surgery, it is not excused for the disciple to see certain things multiple times, and then you should be bold during the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And it has come to us from some of those who are in Al Artach, and some say that fire is made in Al Ayrac, a mound that is pierced through which water is drawn.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	But however I have not seen anyone in our land who has perfected this, nor have I read this in any of the books of the ancients; and it is possible that this is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the spices from Magdala for which it is placed on those who ignore them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And let them be made of wax or of proper iron, and let the extremities of them have this subtlety triangulated, the sharp end thus as that is the form.
Capitol .xxiv.	Capitol .xxiv.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	From the treatment of flesh hanging from the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When on the nose diverse kinds of flesh grow that cause something akin to a stinging sensation from heavy smoke or like a swelling in the nasal area; and this ailment is called polypus because it resembles that swelling.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And if it is cancerous flesh, it appears pale; and what is not pale-colored is not lion-flesh (likely referring to healthy or non-cancerous flesh).
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in those cases where the flesh is not fraudulent nor cancerous, it is necessary that the patient sit between your hands and be placed in the sun, and you should open his nostrils, and pierce the area with a needle in those areas of the flesh.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then extract that to the outer parts, and then dissect what you have grasped of those with a sharp and fine spatula from one part inside where you know all the flesh has been removed; so if there remains any cause by which the amputation is possible, then cut through it with one of the fine instruments easily until nothing remains that could be a reason to leave anything behind.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	And if it is dominated by blood or an abscessed apostema that has become inflamed, then you apply what is necessary; if it is one of the malignant apostemas, then you cut and cauterize it until the blood is stopped and all the cavities are removed.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And then it should be placed in the nose near the beginning with wine or water.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	But if the nose is open and you process moisture that reaches the palate, then you know that it is already healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	But if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you know that inside there is flesh still present in the pus over the bones of the nose to which amputation has not been successful.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore, now it is necessary to introduce a thread into the area where there is any swelling, and tie knots in the thread at intervals, placing between each knot a distance equal to that of a finger or thumb, and treat the patient by inserting one end of the thread into their nostrils either with your hand or another method that is possible for you.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And after this has been done, that he draw his breath in such a way that it reaches the canals of the nose, and let him sit over his handkerchief, for many white-covered faces perform this action at schools, and it is an easy method for those who wish to do so.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then place the two ends of the thread, one end coming out over the nose and the other remaining inside the nose, and then apply stitching to the flesh with the knots that are on the thread, and do this until you know that the flesh is already secured by the knots of the thread.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then extract the thread and place it in the nose near the site of the bleeding, put a plug there, and do this for three days or longer until the poultice has dissolved all that is rotten from the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And then at the end of the treatment, place a lead cannula in the nose for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	If you decide to use drying as part of the treatment, apply it accordingly.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument used for nasal medication delivery with which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And make this from silver or ceramic, which should resemble a small open lamp, like a little bowl, and the body similarly.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you want, make a closed tube like a reed, and the opening of the instrument used for purging should be flat and uncovered; to which you should hold it at the back part of him, with which you have what is heated in oil or whatever you want from the juices and suction devices.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these purgatives are precious: take of castoreum, white balsam, ginger, saffron crocus, long pepper, scammony, and spikenard each an ounce. Mix with the juice of leek and onion, and make pills; dissolve one pill in tepid water, and give it to the patient lying down to inhale through the nose.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	On nasal polyps in the outer parts of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Small greenish growths are nasal polyps in the outer parts of the nose, and they swell and increase within a few days to the point where their presence is noticeable.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And because of this, you should incise it at the beginning of its appearance and completely remove all of it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Then place a cautery or a burning medicine in its place over the area.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	But if the incision is delayed until it has grown larger, then consider whether it has become hardened, firm, dark in color, and less sensitive. In this case, do not touch it with iron, for it is a chronic aposteme; because many times one who incises this aposteme does great harm to the area where it was.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the abscess is of a red appearance and not of a black color, and whenever incision is possible in all of it, then evacuate the patient and incise that without fear, and treat the area with something that dries and constrains until it heals.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	Of缝合鼻子和嘴唇和耳朵的情况，当它们的连续性因伤或类似情况而断裂。
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when you cause a rupture of continuity in one of these cartilages, you do not succeed much in that operation except in some cases.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when someone has any of those causes, you should consider if it is a fresh wound with its own blood, and then you should缝合伤口的两边，并且接下来治疗内部以促进愈合。 
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the edges of the discontinuity are already separated and each is made whole, then you must pull each part of its visible chain until blood comes out.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then bring together the two lips with sutures and tighten them, and sprinkle dragon's blood powder over them, which has been finely ground, and place over the powder a piece of diafinition plaster or some other consolidating plaster, and leave that dressing for two days or three, and then remove it and replace the plaster until the stitches have separated on their own, and then treat with an ointment until it is healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	And the method of suturing is that you close the discontinuity using needles as we have recommended in the suturing of the abdomen, or close the discontinuity with stitches as you know how to do.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	On the extraction of those causes that occur within the two lips in the internal parts.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Often, in many men, within the internal parts of their lips, there appear hard swellings resembling lard. Some of these are smaller and some are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, you must turn the lips inside out and cut each of those hard swellings completely, then fill the area with finely ground sage until the blood is constricted. Then wash it with sweet wine and treat the area with a styptic agent until it is healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	Capitol .xxviii.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	From the incision of the flesh fitted into the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	There are many swellings above the flesh fitted into the gums, which the ancients called alveoli. Then you must suspend that with an ounce or hold that with forceps and incise that deeply to its root, allowing the pus or blood to flow.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	Then apply over the area some crushed sage or other styptic or cicatrizant powders.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then incise it again, and cauterize it, because after the cautery it will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	On the extraction of teeth with forceps.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth, both those inside and outside, and between the gums, there are sharp splinters, decayed parts, and some swellings that are blackened or take on yellow or green colors, indicating corruption in the gum and leading to decayed teeth.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And therefore it is necessary that you seat the patient between your hands and place their head on your thigh, and examine the teeth in which you see those scurfy deposits and causes resembling sand so that none of them remain, and this is done for the blackness and yellowness and other conditions to be cleansed.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Therefore, if what remains is at the beginning of the reason, that's good; and if not, then you repeat the reasoning on those [points] another day and the second and the third until it comes to the final statement in which you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And know that teeth require various forms and many shapes of forceps according to what is prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And therefore the razor with which the tooth is cut from inside is different from the razor used to cut between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of razors you should prepare, which you will see shortly:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter .xxx.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	For the eradication of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	Here is the translation line by line:
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, you must be certain which tooth is painful, and once you know well, then you need to scrape around the tooth with a spatula that has some power, until it separates from the gum all around, and then pull it out with your fingers, or with fine scissors bit by bit until it comes out completely.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then take large strong pliers for good leverage or a strong extraction, and hold the patient's head between your knees so that you can control it well and it doesn't move, and then pull the tooth straight out in such a way that you do not break it, nor cause greater pain to the patient.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And if it is not easily removed, then take one of those instruments and carefully extract it from all sides, applying force to remove it just as you did at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is loose or corroded, then you must wrap that loose part with cloth and secure it with the tip of a fine thread so that it does not break when you apply pressure to it with the pliers.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And it is necessary that you act carefully with scarification around all parts of the gum and be mindful of your strength so as not to tear it or leave a part broken, and return to the patient for the mischief to be greater than the initial pain.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And beware that you do not do what some ignorant barbers do in their stubbornness and audacity regarding the removal of them, which is not what we have recommended; for many times they bring upon men great illnesses which are more difficult to treat, and the roots of which remain hidden entirely, or some of those, or even extract it along with some bones of the jaw as we have often witnessed.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And then after the extraction, wash the mouth with hot wine or acidic wine with salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if bleeding occurs because of this, just as it may happen occasionally, then sprinkle some amount of sage over the wound, and if the sage does not help, apply a cautery.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The form of the forceps and delicate tongs with which the tooth is extracted at the beginning should be long on the outer end, short in handle, and thick, so that they do not bend when you use them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And they should be such that the thick handles ensure that when you grasp them tightly, they do not bend, and their outer ends should be short.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And they should be made of Indian iron, properly crafted with straight ends, and at the ends of these, there should be teeth that fit into each other and grip tightly through constriction. Sometimes, the ends of these should have the shape of the beak of a bird called a ciconia, which is a stork, and they are of strong constriction.
Capitol .xxxi.	Capitol .xxxi.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	For the eradication of teeth and extraction of the bones of the jaws that are trapped.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you must extract a tooth that is broken and some root remains, then it is necessary for you to place a cotton ball over the area for one or two days until the spot is softened; and then insert tongs or forceps whose ends are shaped like the beak of a bird called stork or spoonbill, the form of the forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The limbs should be treated within as if they were iron or wood.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if it does not obey to you with these forceps or tongs, then you must cut over the root and peel off all the flesh and introduce the tool which is called an atale, which is a small lever of this shape:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And if it is a thick short extremity, make a small incision, and do not penetrate deeply so that it is not broken. 
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Therefore, if by this the incision is well-placed, it's good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is triangular with an extremely sharp point, in which there should be some thickness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second instrument is that it should be triangular and have a finer tip.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And already assisted with this instrument having two prongs, which has the following form:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And with other instruments which I previously described for tooth scraping; because it is very useful to perform this with the instrument which resembles an onion's root, and this is its form:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	From the twisted or shortened triangular extremity, which has some thickness, and should not be forced in such a way that it is not broken.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And you should know that the tools for the teeth are similar to other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	May the skilled and subtle artisans find for themselves according to what the operation and diverse diseases signify to them; for there are diseases for which the ancients neither mentioned nor prescribed specific instruments, due to the forms of various types.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the jawbone or other bones of the mouth are fractured, or if you can, then treat it by placing it in its proper position using what is suitable among the instruments and forceps which we have mentioned in the extraction of tooth roots, and assist with the manipulation which has this form:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And let there be a small swelling that is reduced little by little, and it should be compressed or held with the mouth so that it does not spread or escape until the bone is fully set; then restore the area with appropriate medicines.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a small hole or decay in the bone, then clean that area of the decay and its darkness, and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Capitol .xxxii.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	Regarding the treatment of prominent teeth over others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When the prominent teeth do not follow their natural course and the form is loose, especially when it happens to women, and particularly to those who are more venerable; therefore you must consider: if a tooth is close to another tooth and it is not possible to pull or file it down, then extract that one; but if it is not attached to another tooth, then cut it with this instrument of which this is the form; and it resembles a pig's snout, and should be made of Indian steel with an extremely sharp edge.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And let your incision be such that you cut it over several days due to the hardness of the tooth, and that none of the other teeth are infected.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if a tooth is prominently exposed to filing, then file it with an Indian iron file, which has this form:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And if it is all made of Indian iron and the margin is also well-made; and it should be made with fine points like a file with which needles are made, with which the tooth should be filed little by little over several days with ease, so that no other tooth is damaged or falls out.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And then sew that area at the end, and shave that place with sharp razors.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if it is a tooth of which a part is broken and hurts the tongue, then you must file that inside so that the roughness of that fracture is removed and smoothed out, and fill it so that the tongue is not hurt and speech is not impaired.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter .xxxiii.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	For the restoration of bad teeth with gold or silver filings.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When you encounter front teeth that are loose due to concussion or displacement from impact or falling, and the patient cannot chew on what they eat, and you have treated it with astringent medicines but your treatment has not been effective, now in order for them not to fall out, it is recommended to bind them with gold thread rather than silver thread, because silver can corrode and will loosen over some days, whereas gold never changes.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And let the thread be of such subtlety and thickness that it can fit between the teeth; the method is to take the thread and place double its amount between two healthy teeth, then weave it with two twists of the thread around the loose tooth or teeth until the thread reaches the healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	Then repeat the weaving from the side where you began, and hold your hand with ease and skill until it is secure. 
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And let your ligature be with which you tie the threads of the teeth that do not fit properly.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then cut the excess bile ducts with forceps or scissors, and add those to each area carefully, and place them between the healthy tooth and the diseased tooth, so that they do not cause injury to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then loosen that binding tightly as a rope.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	And if it is loosened or broken, strengthen that or those with another thread in such a manner throughout its entire length. 
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the reaction of two healthy teeth and two diseased ones, just as you see these tied together:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when it is necessary to return one or two teeth back to their proper places at the gum line, and they are grown back as we have described, and that they hold.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And this is not done by just any artisan but by a wise one.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And sometimes a piece of cow's bone is shaped like a tooth, and it is placed in the location where the tooth is missing, and it is fastened as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	On the condition of the ligament that affects the tongue and prevents speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament that affects the tongue sometimes is natural, with which a person is born, or it is accidental and occurs due to an injury that has already healed.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation involves opening the mouth of the patient, with their head positioned in your lap; then lift their tongue, and next cut that nervous ligament according to the width within which the tongue is detached from its root.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	But if there is any hardness or knotting in that area, and this is due to the healing of an injury, then you take some force and split that area along the width within which you have cut the ligament and dissolved the knot.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And be careful not to make a cut in the skin and that you do not split the artery here, causing blood to flow.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	Then wash the remnants of the incision with wine or with vinegar or with cold water; then place a lint under the tongue; this is the method by which the patient should keep their tongue under a lint every night to prevent it from becoming solidified again. 
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat with the other causes so that he may be healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	It seems like you've provided a section marker or heading from an old text, possibly a medieval manuscript or historical document. The ".xxxv." indicates that this is the 35th chapter or section (since "xxxv" in Roman numerals equals 35). Without any accompanying content, there isn't much to translate or explain further. If you have additional text from this section and would like it translated or explained, please provide it!
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	This line appears to be in an old form of a Romance language, similar to medieval Latin or early Italian/Spanish/French. It refers to the extraction of a ranula from the tongue. Here is the translation:
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Here is the translation line by line:
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation on him is that you open the mouth of the patient facing the sun and examine the abscess.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see it of dark or black color, hard, in which the patient does not feel any sensation, then do not touch that which is gangrenous.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it has turned white, where there is moisture, then you insert your finger into it and incise that with a fine spatula, and cut it entirely; and if blood begins to flow during the time of your operation, then you place over it thrice-ground vitriol until the bleeding stops.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then return to your work until you have completely removed it, washing it with sweet wine and salt; and treat that area with the other cure prescribed until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XXXVI.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the extraction of abscesses from the ears and those that form in the throat, as well as other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When they occur in the throat, they are glands that resemble small lumps, which appear externally and are called ears. When you treat them as we have said in the division and it does not heal, then consider if the abscess is hard, dark in color, with little sensation; in this case, do not touch it with metal.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of red color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron because of the blood flow; before you leave that to ripen within, and then either you will take it out or it will break open by itself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of white color, like a root, and its stem is thin, then that is what needs to be cut open.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation on it is that you consider, before your operation, if the abscess has already rested after being cauterized completely or if it has decreased somewhat; and then make the patient sit facing the sun, with their head in your lap, open their mouth, and the servant takes their tongue and holds it out using a noble instrument of this form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And it should be made of silver or iron, and it should be sharp like a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	So as you press with that instrument on the tongue and the abscess is shown to you, spit over it with your saliva, then take some [ substance ] and insert it into the abscess, and pull it outwards as much as you can. 
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And here is the translation of the given line:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	And it is similar to forceps, but the ends of it are curved, so that the opening of each one is in line with the other, sharp points, which are made of hardened iron.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	But if this instrument is not available to you, then incise it with a spatula of which this is the form: It is sharp on one side, blunt on the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And since you have incised one part, incise the other in the same manner of incision, and then the patient will be cleansed with cold water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a flow of blood, cleanse with water decocted from pomegranate peel or myrtle leaves and similar astringents until the flow of blood is stopped, and then treat it until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And sometimes abscesses form in the gums or on the other ears, and incise those in the same manner as I have described for incising two parts.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I have already treated a woman with an abscess that had formed in her gums, which abscess tended to a brown color, was of little sensitivity, and had already closed her gums, causing her to breathe through a very narrow passage. She had been deprived of food and water, and she was nearing death if it had lasted for another day or two.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had risen so much that there were two routes through which it would burst out from between two folds.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	And I carefully cut into one of its openings and pulled it out, and a large portion was removed. Then I incised the other side from where I understood there was another route, then I closed the mouth of it, and held its tongue, then I placed the onion in that abscess. 
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then I cut away a large part of it, and there was only a little bit of blood flowing from it.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	So the swelling of that woman is absolute, and she should start drinking water immediately, then eat food. So I did not stop incising that abscess many times for a long time, and another abscess would form in place of it, which I continued to incise until that period was prolonged.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	So I took some material and cauterized the swelling of it, thus adding to the treatment; then I walked around and did not know what God would do about that situation near me.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter XXXVII.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	On the incision of a boil when it is abscessed.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When the catarrh affects the boil, and it becomes abscessed and elongated, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is in a part that is thick and round, then it is called a bubo.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	However, when it is treated with what we have said in the division and you do not trust your treatment, and you find that the abscess has already hardened and become subtle, then you must incise those parts that are round and aggregated. And if it extends to a certain length and is bloody, of dark or black color, and is not at the center, then you must attempt to incise it, for there is fear for the patient in such a condition.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see that [the worm] according to the manner I have said about its whiteness and length, make the patient sit up and press their tongue with an instrument of which the shape protrudes, then insert the ounce into the new opening, and pull it down and cut it with one of two instruments which are mentioned in the incision of two halves.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And it is necessary that you do not incise beyond what is appropriate over the natural limit of its addition, for if you incise more, you will damage their speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And then for the incision, use what we have recommended in the incision of two melons, and treat it so that it may be healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	If the patient is frightened by the incision of the cautery, it is necessary to use ingenuity in the cauterization due to their fear, and the method of the cautery on them is only with sharp water. You must place the head of the patient on your knee, then press their tongue with the instrument we have mentioned, then take the water we have described in the chapter on cauterization, warm it up with that live cause, and hold it neither too thick nor too thin, and with that fill the concavity of the instrument which has this shape:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then take the medicine in your hand and apply it to the uvula for a short period of time until you see it become darkened and soothed by the effect of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you want, take a cloth and wrap it around the end of the ray, then submerge the cloth in the medicine, and insert the ray with the cloth into a tube until the cloth adheres to that tube, and do this as many times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization process, and then let it dry out and fall off after about three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to reapply the medicine, do so, and then clean around the cauterized area with a cloth dipped in wine vinegar, modify that which is in the vicinity of it from the effects of the medicine, wash it with cold water, and treat it externally with an embrocation, and internally with decoctions until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this type of treatment is safer than incision and lasts longer in terms of protection.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	During certain instances, the uvula is treated with something subtler than cautery and incision, for it is healed through sublimation in this manner: take candles, hyssop, origanum, rue, Arabian sage, camomile, fennel, and similar herbs; combine all these ingredients or some of them in a pot; they should be submerged in sour wine and boiled; the pot must be well sealed with an appropriate lid, and there should be a tube in the middle of the pot on which a concave instrument made of silver or iron is placed.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And the end should be inserted into the patient's mouth so that the vapor reaches the uvula over which the instrument is placed, so that the uvula becomes moist and obscured.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And then repeat this process several times until it is dry, and be careful not to perform this treatment at the beginning of an inflammation event, because it could excessively aggravate the inflammation. You should not do this but rather leave the treatment of the inflammation to cauterization.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	But if you do not have this instrument, then take a reed and attach a hen's egg to one end of it, so that the patient's mouth is protected, because the eggshell prevents the vapor from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	It seems like you've provided a section indicator, "Capitul .xxxviii.", which translates to "Chapter XXXVIII" in English. This indicates the start of chapter thirty-eight in a text or document. If there is more content from this chapter that needs translation or explanation, please provide it, and I'll be happy to help!
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On the extraction of spines and of what adheres in the eyelid, and of other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Motives seen adhering in the groin or spine of feet or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And that which does not appear and is hidden in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because by doing so, the cause attached to the throat will be forcefully expelled through vomiting; or let the patient swallow a piece of nap (a type of herb) or of chicory lettuce or a bit of dry bread; or take a piece of dry sea sponge, and moisten it strongly with honey, then give the patient to swallow that, because when it reaches the place where thorns are and is extracted, it will be forcefully expelled.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And further, take an eel and bind it with honey, and place it inside, and gently extract it; or take a leek and gently insert it and gently draw it out.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	And if it is not forcefully expelled by those means which we have mentioned, then use an instrument of lead according to this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And it should be thicker than a small tube, and at the end of it, there should be a cavity that you can easily insert into the patient's throat.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And raise his head up, and be careful not to touch the bones of his throat, so that you do not cause harm and avoid pushing against the bone or spine, or let the doctor use his hand for that. 
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	And however, the patient should be involved more, by their knowledge of the place of the attached cause and pressing into it, and they pull their hand with the instrument onto it, all of this according to the quantity that is prepared for them internally before being plugged in.
Capitol .xxxix.	The text provided is not a full sentence but rather a chapter or section heading. Here's how it would be translated:
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	From the extraction of the leech attached to the neck.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When treating a leech with the methods we have mentioned in the section on treatment with medicines and not compresses, consider placing the patient's neck under the sun, since you have moved its tongue with an instrument that we have recommended. 
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore, if you use bloodletting, extract it with a small needle or with subtle and appropriate gestures.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible for you to extract with that, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the throat of the patient, and then place in the concavity of the cannula a piece of ignited iron, and do this as many times (until the blood-sucking creature is dead and removed from the throat) and the patient must abstain from water for the entire day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a vessel full of cold water, and open the mouth of the patient in it, and wash the mouth with that; and do not let any part go unwashed and change the water every hour with your hand, for the blood-sucking leeches will immediately sense the water passing.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	If it is not relieved by what we have recommended, then fumigate the patient with camphor or asafoetida using the instrument we have recommended for the fumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, whichever may apply. 
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And here is the translation of the provided sentence:
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not work, then you repeat the subfumigation several times, and abstain the patient from drinking, and eating salty and spicy foods, and do not drink water, and thus it is necessary that this regimen be strictly followed.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument with which bloodsucking from the throat is treated when it is seen; and it resembles forceps in that way, though there is some curvature to it:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
Capitol .xl.	Capitol .xl.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In this passage is the summary of the discourse concerning abscesses and their incision.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And in various ways there is a difference in puncturing and drying them by two methods, of which one is through the type of abscesses that you insert into; and by this we address the humors.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second method concerns the areas where bodily accidents occur, for an abscess in the head is different from an abscess in the buttocks; and an abscess occurring in a fleshy part is different from an abscess in a joint; and each of them requires its own treatment through surgery.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And regarding abscesses, some of them should not be punctured until the pus is fully matured or complete.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	And other abscesses that need to be treated when they are still raw and have not yet fully matured according to their completeness, such as abscesses near joints. For an abscess that approaches a joint, its nature is prolonged until you can remove what is inside it; otherwise, the ligaments or nerves of that joint may become corrupted, causing contraction of that limb. Or if the abscess is near a principal limb and you delay piercing it until it matures on its own, it might affect the principal limb; or if it is near the buttocks, pierce it even if not fully matured. Do not puncture one that is raw and incomplete in digestion, but rather one close to the buttocks, so that its poison does not spread internally within the buttocks, leading to fistula formation, or that it might not heal properly at its site.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	And you must know the time of the abscess's puncture, and this is when it has matured.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And know that it is mature when there is the cessation of pain and the cessation of fever, then the reduction of heat and pulse, and the sharpness at the head of the abscess, and the other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And you should know that the puncture must be made at the lowest point of the abscess, where the pus from the healing prominence will come out.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And the puncture should always be made along the length of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in areas of the hands or feet, and in places of veins, tendons, nerves; and finally, in all similar places where there is no reflection; for in those that do reflect, use puncturing according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	But when the abscess is in a fleshy area, it is better to delay the puncture until the digestion of the second stage is confirmed, as we have said; for if you pierce it before that, it prolongs the suffering of the poor patient and increases filth, and hardens the lips of it and deepens it.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	However, some abscesses are punctured across the width of the flesh or body due to necessity, or according to what the affected limb requires.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And you must administer a small puncture for small abscesses, and in large abscesses, a large puncture or multiple incisions according to the size of the abscess.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And for those abscesses in which the skin must be depressed and cut open, when it is done thus like bread and becomes so that it remains stable, just as if you were dealing with clusters of boils and buboes.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those which are incised with a section having three angles; and of those in which it is incised like the shape of a miter leaf, such as the aphthous sores of the ankles.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of those in which a round section and a lunar section are administered, and similar things to those.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	And for those that are not like abscesses on the surface of the skin, you must pierce them with a superficial puncture or a flat incision only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the abscess is large and has already collected much pus, you should pierce it, not worrying about extracting all of the pus at that time; first extract some of it, then apply a poultice to the abscess on another day, then extract a larger portion, and continue doing this several times according to gradual progression until it is completely drained.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And especially if the patient is of weak constitution, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old person in decline, because the animal spirit often dissolves with the discharge of pus, and the patient can die quickly, so you must operate carefully.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Pay close attention to this chapter with great caution, and when you perform the puncture on these abscesses, make sure to clean the wounds and then consider whether the wound of the abscess is small or flat; in such cases, apply ointments made from lime or old pitch. If the abscess is large and the fissures from the puncture are numerous, then you must place a bandage on each spot until they heal together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the abscess a part of the chain is severed or you have hollowed that out along the circumference, then you must pack it with old pitch or a cloth bandage made from lime-infused material, just as when you extract stones or roots, keeping them moist; strengthen that area by the third day; and then treat it further using appropriate ointments until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	And if blood flow occurs during your operation, then you should administer cold water and sweet wine in which you soak a cloth, and place that over the site of the bleeding multiple times.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	But if the bleeding persists, then you must administer treatment and cure, and use powders which I have recommended in various places of this our book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	But if it is during the winter season, and the site of the swelling is an area with many nerves, then you should soak pillows in wine and heated oil, and place them over those areas.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is during summer, and the areas are fleshy, then you should place pillows soaked in water and oil or in wine and oil, and all of this should be done repeatedly until the third day, as we have said, and then you must drain the swelling, clean it, and administer to its treatment whatever suits it until it is healed.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary to know about the treatment of swellings generally, but according to the method of distinction, I have already spoken of each swelling individually in separate chapters regarding how it should be treated.
Capitol .xli.	Capitol .xli.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Of the section of abscesses which come upon the nape of the neck.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	On the nape of the neck, small abscesses appear, and they are similar to nodes that contain tunics in their formation; and their kinds are spots.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And among them are pustules, and those that contain moisture similar to lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And among them are those that contain moisture similar to powder, and they resemble each other; and there are also those that are stony and hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those, there is no fear, because the extraction of those does not cause any opposition or harm.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in the section of those is that you express them with an instrument whose form is appropriate for this, which is called a probe, until you know what it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	For if what it contains is moisture, then you should divide it by making a longitudinal section with a superficial incision in the following manner:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And you begin at the section of line B within line G. Then as the humidity is evacuated, you scar that skin which contains that moisture, and do not leave any cause behind, for the condition returns if any cause remains.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then immerse a cloth in Egyptian ointment, if it is available, and if not, in water and salt; and fill the wound with that and leave it there for another day, because with this you corrode all that is rotten of that film.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then apply the Egyptian ointment to that cloth a second and third time if necessary, until you are confident that there is no longer any rot caused by that film; then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if the abscess contains fatty nodes, then you should incise it in the following manner:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	using a section having the shape of a cross, and insert your fingers between the two edges of the incision and spread it out in all directions, and exert your strength in extracting the membrane which contains that.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	But if your bow (tool or method) causes difficulties, then do what I have first described to you.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly treat the calcified abscess with incision and cure as I have told you; the incision on a calcified abscess is lighter, because it has little blood and little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And sometimes there are some swellings on the heads of some men in which it is not all moisture; the cause of this was that I dissected an abscess on the head of an old woman and found the abscess as hard, rough, white, which could not be crushed, and if someone were to strike with that, it would hurt.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	But in the other swellings or accidents in the head, which are not covered by this chapter, such as the swellings that occur on children's heads and around the earlobes, these sections are all considered to be superficial.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And stop the perforation of those from the lower part so that the body is relieved of the discharge in the lower areas.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And then treat those with whatever is appropriate for healing.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	On the incision of scrofula which occurs in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Moisture and cold often cause these swellings in the neck and armpits; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck are formed by moisture that develops between them, and all of these scrofula are within their own specific layer, just as in the knots and swellings of the head, as we have mentioned.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the types of these scrofula are diverse, for some are stone-like, some contain moisture, and others are malignant and do not respond to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, in the case where you find it to be of good disposition upon touch, wherein the color that is visible is close to the color of the swelling, and it is soft throughout, and not attached to the neck's nerves, veins, or arteries, and is not hard, you should incise it with a sharp superficial cut from above down along the line G within the B line, and scrape it thoroughly, and extend both sides of the swelling with forceps, or with multiple forceps if needed, as we have said for swellings in the head, and extract it bit by bit.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more cautious that the vein or nerves not be cut.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And let the spatula not be too sharp, so that it does not cause you to cut with your hand or disturb the patient, and cut only what is necessary; for if you were to cut a vein or artery and prevent your operation, then apply ground vitriol or other powders that stop blood flow, and constrict the wound, and leave within what alleviates the sharpness of the abscess so that the wound may soften and begin to become pus-filled.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is congealed.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Then return to your operation before you have completed it. 
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then examine with your index finger if there is any cause of the other small swellings, and then incise those and clean them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is near the main vein of the large swelling, you should not incise that swelling at its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Before that, you must wrap it with a strong double bandage and leave it in such a way that it falls by itself without harm.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the wound with old cataplasm that you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then treat it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you incise that swelling entirely, then you must bring the two edges of the wound together and suture them immediately so that there is no remaining excess material.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that there is excess material due to the size of the swelling, you must understand how to incise its root, remove it, and administer sutures as mentioned.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for those swellings that contain moisture, puncture it with a superficial incision where you see the site of maturation, and make an incision to drain the pus from the base of the swelling, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then administer a puncture, using cantharides with ointment and similar substances, so that it corrodes what remains of the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And then when you see the wound already cleaned, now you treat it with a poultice of generative flesh until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Capitol .xliii.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	From the section about the incision of the pus pocket occurring within the throat.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients used to call this section the epiglottis, and I have not seen anyone in our land perform such a procedure.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the speech of those [individuals]. 
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	And in men with hernias, the extraction of the epididymis must be avoided, as this would not bring benefit because all the veins and major ones of the patient are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	And in those who have abscesses caused in the mouth or throat or both ears, when the disease is not in the bone, one must operate on the section of the gland to avoid the destruction that is caused by perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, when we want to do this, we must incise the eyelid leaving three circles of the eyelid, or four small sections across its width between two circles in quantity, so that the cut is on the tarsus, not on the cartilage, and this location is suitable for cutting because it lacks flesh and the blood vessels there are sparse.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is inexperienced, it is necessary that he stretches out the tendon of the ankle with his thumb, and then cuts the tendon until it reaches the channel, but avoids the blood vessels if any are seen.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then incise the hernia as we have recommended; it is indicated on the section of the canal by the flame which is of that kind when it is disrupted and by the separation of the voice.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	So when the hour is suspected in which the perforation is feared, add two threads to the chain of the wound, and use that single one for the cartilage. 
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow where it needs to be healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Albucasis says that the summary of the speech we have recounted is not an exposition but rather that some of these abscesses have obstructed the windpipe of the patient, and the patient has come close to death, and their breath is cut off, and some proceed to incise the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe through the site of the wound by some respiration and be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And by this, you should leave the wound open until the harmfulness of the disease is consumed; and it takes three days for the harmfulness to pass; and then after that, you should close the wound, and care for it until it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen in my practice is that a servant took a knife and inserted it into her throat and with that, incised a part of the windpipe, and I was called for her treatment, and I found the sound just as it sounds when one is dying, and uncovered the wound and found blood that had seeped from the small wound.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore, I must confess that she had not cut any vein or artery, and the air came out of the wound, and she bandaged it until it healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And it does not affect the servant if there is no hoarseness in their voice, and then after some days they return to the improvement of their conditions.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that in the section of the hernia there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Capitol .xliv.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Of sectioning over an abscess that you encounter on the groin externally, and it is called a groin hernia.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This abscess called a groin hernia is a large abscess according to the body's color, and it occurs frequently in women. 
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it happens in two ways, for either it is natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural case, there is no need to cure.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental occurs in two ways, one of which resembles fatty knots, and the other way is similar to an abscess, which is caused by arterial obstruction, and fear is associated with it.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And it is not necessary to apply pressure with iron except in the case where it is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you should probe that area and investigate it with your finger. If you find something resembling fatty knots, and it is not suspended by any veins, then incise it as you would for knots, and extract it using what contains the flesh and bursa; otherwise, thoroughly examine its entire being, and then treat the area with whatever cure is necessary until it is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLV.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	On the section of types of knots or nodules.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	About the various types of knots, I have already described all their types in the division [or classification].
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And it is necessary that I recount thus the difference between a knot and a hernia as if there were doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	So I say that with a hernia, there is heat and fever and intense pain until the swelling of the excess subsides; and complete putrefaction occurs at which point the fever, pain, and heat cease.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But with a knot, there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains a solid mass which is like a lion's paw in its own sack.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it depends on the color of the body, and its beginning is like a seed and forms in such a way, whether larger or smaller, and they are of two types: dry or fatty, containing moisture, and the colors of the moisture are spots, as I have said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	So it is necessary, when you reach the treatment of a knot, that you extract it and seek to address it at its origin using a method called intromission, the form of which will be described in the upcoming chapter.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And it is the method of investigating abscesses and all knots, which involves taking this instrument and inserting it into the most moist area you find in the abscess. You will stir the said areas little by little with that instrument until you know that the instrument has penetrated the core.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And then finish placing your hand according to the measurement of the size of the abscess, and then extract the foreign matter and examine what has been left in the wound.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the current humidity, of whatever color it may be, is expelled, then you incise it with a superficial section as I have said in the case of other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no humidity left in the wound from the foreign matter, then you know that it is pus.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And dry it with a section in the shape of a cross as follows:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	Do as you have been taught, suspend it with weights, and unroll the bandage easily from all sides, and cover the skin or sack, if you can, over that and extract the scab with the knot.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to extract that scab, and sometimes this happens, and then you must remove it in pieces to ensure nothing remains.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	For if any part of it remains, whether little or much, the scab will return as before.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that some small part remains from it, then complete the wound with some sharp and strong corrosive powders and bind up the wound, and place over that which is about to become an abscess a cautery, and treat that with another form of cure until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if the swelling is large, then you cut the two sides of it and treat that with something that promotes flesh growth.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	But if the pulse is contrary, or non-pulsating, then you cut and fill the area with something like triturated vitriol and leave that in place for two or three days until the wound becomes pus-filled and the blood's swelling subsides; then return to excising what remains of the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLVI.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	On the forms of instruments necessary for section and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Regarding the forms of the instruments used for insertion, they come in three sizes: some are large, some are medium, and some are small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large instrument is as follows:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The method of midwifery is as follows:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of introducing something small is as follows:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	Here is the translation of the given line:
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of the experts, and they are called herbs, and one of those is called birch.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And from three spices, for among them are grain, wheat, and a little [of something else].
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of great experience, form of it:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of experienced midwife, form of it:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the small intestine, as follows:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It seems that the text is written in a form of medieval or old Romance language, which shares similarities with Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Given this context, here's an attempt to translate the provided sentence into English:
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And you make them round, thick, like large needles with which leather is sewn together, and they are made of citrus wood, or wood, or iron, or silver, and the best ones are those made of citrus wood.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And the practice is to use black feathers, with which they remember that by those the fistulas are opened in the cavity where they are reflected, and are illuminated with their light with those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And of three types, for some are long, and others medium, and others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and the stricture of it.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Forma del experient gran de plom:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Form of the experienced midwife with lead:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Form of the small lead pipe:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the tumors are of various types, for some are simple ones, which have only one curvature, and they are of three types: large, small, and medium.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And from these are formed hooks, and they are of three kinds.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of those hooks having two curves, and of three types.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And since they have three curvatures, and they are of three types.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	The form of a simple large unit, the form being as follows:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Form of a simple half unit:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Form of a simple small unit, the form being as follows:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Form of a large golden unit:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Form of a half golden unit, the form being as follows:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Form of a small golden unit, the form being as follows:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a large unit having two curvatures:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Form of a half unit having two curvatures:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a small unit having two curvatures:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a large unit having three curvatures:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the scalpels with which nodules and abscesses are cut and squeezed, and they come in three types, for there is a large one, a medium one, and a small one.
Forma de scapel gran:	Form of the large scalpel: 
Forma del scapel migier:	Forma del scapel migier:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Forma de scapel pauc:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The extremities with which a section is made are sharp, and the other extremities are not sharp, and they are not placed in such a manner as to cause harm during the lancing of nodes; this is done to avoid the risk of incision into a vein or nerve, so that through these actions the patient may be healed and find some tranquility from the heat which comes from the lancing of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of almagidas, and they are of three types: large, medium, and small, as you will see.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of the large magda:
Forma de magda migier:	Form of the medium magda:
Forma de magda pauc:	Form of the small magda:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They should be made from wheat and have the appearance of grains with which alcohol is made.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it is on the smooth extremity that is punctured with a hidden spatula and in that area, you can access both the internal and external parts as you see fit.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spatimis, which are hidden between the fingers causing the puncture of the abscesses and the patients do not feel them, and they come in three types: large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of cups with which the blood flow is interrupted, and it comes in three types: large, medium, and small; the shapes are as follows:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut, e sian subtils.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And it is necessary that these types of cupping glasses be large, medium, and small, so that through those you can quickly draw off blood flow when needed, and at the times when first aid medicine is not available.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use them to cut the blood throughout the entire body, but only in fleshy areas, such as on the creases of the chest and thighs, and at the creases of the arms, and from the breasts and the belly and the knees, and similar fleshy moist creases.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And sometimes other small instruments resembling scars of vipers in this form are made; with which the blood is cut off when performing phlebotomy or proper incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes they are made round in this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	On the treatment of men's breasts that resemble those of women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Sometimes the breasts of some men become swollen due to the pressure of sleep as they start to become flaccid, and then the breasts swell and resemble those of women, becoming pendulous and full of abscesses.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And for the one who wishes to treat this condition, you must incise those areas with a lunar section in this form, from line B inward to line G, and then remove all the swelling, and then apply a flesh-growing medication to the wound, and then sew together the two lips of the wound, and care for it until it is healed.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Here is the translation of the given text line by line into English:
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the incision of that which needs to be cut due to the restlessness of the patient and blood flow, then you must fill the wound with a cloth soaked in a corrosive ointment and leave it there until it corrodes the fat tissues, and then treat it so that it may heal.
Capitol .xlviii.	It seems like you've provided a section or chapter title from an old text, specifically "Capitul .xlviii." which translates to "Chapter XLVIII" in English. This indicates that the following content is part of the 48th chapter of whatever work it belongs to. If you have more text from this chapter and need help translating or understanding it, feel free to share!
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	This line appears to be describing the treatment of abscesses that occur under the armpit. Here is the translation:
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These swellings that come from a kind of scrofula, which are hard and contain a kind of sac.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And of those that contain humidity; and those that contain humidity must be incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from the line G to the line B. And when all is evacuated which is in the abscess of the pus, then fill it with old wool and clean the inside on the next day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And then the wound should be left alone and treated with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess is from the glands and the scrophulas, then you should incise it in the same manner as we have described in the section about scrophulas.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	And if the plague has spread to the point of putrefaction, then apply a cautery as we have previously described.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLIX.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	On the section of abscesses that occur due to arteries or veins.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an artery is ruptured and the chain that lies over it becomes hardened, then a spotted abscess may occur. The signs by which one can recognize whether inflammation and abscess are due to an artery or vein: for when the abscess is from an artery, it extends lengthwise along the course of the body; and when you press on the abscess with your fingers, you feel a rustling sound within it.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is due to a vein appears round on the surface of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And lancing this swelling is an error, and especially so in those areas near the armpits, and at the elbows, and on the neck, and in many places of the body; and it is very dangerous, therefore the treatment with a knife should be avoided, and for those located in the extremities or head, it must be prevented.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	And for those who suffer from the inflation of the artery orifice, make a longitudinal incision along the cord; then widen the incision with hooks and expose the artery, removing the tunics so that it is uncovered.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	Then place the needle and make it penetrate to the other side, and tie the artery with double thread in two places—this method is what I have taught you for the extraction of two arteries that are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	Then widen the area between two ligaments with a spatula until all the blood is drained out, and thus the swelling is dissolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then apply a treatment that promotes drying so that the ligaments heal; and subsequently treat it with appropriate ointments until it is healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if the abscess is due to venous dryness, then you must hold as much of the abscess as possible with your hand and then insert the needle in the place where you have held it; make that penetrate; and let it go through so that you extract from the other side, and then tie up the abscess tightly according to what I have told you about binding with a double thread from both sides using the two ends of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	And if you fear that the thread might be pulled out, then insert the needle with the thread throughout the abscess from the beginning of the needle, and secure the threads at four points.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then dry the abscess in its middle so that when what is inside has been removed, you cut away the excess of the skin, and leave what remains tied.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then place upon it a pillow that you have soaked in wine and oil, and then administer the treatment which is made with plasters and ointments until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter on the abscess that occurs due to nerve twisting.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Here is the translation of the provided line:
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And the operation is performed in the areas of the instep or the ankle, or in any area where the joints are painful.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a severe abscess, and its color resembles that of the rest of the body, and it occurs in the major parts of the body where such conditions are predisposed to, and when it tightens with intensity, the patient appears stupefied.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And if it is not an abscess that has aggregated in the front of the body, and for this reason, the chain is left as is, and it is spread out throughout all parts and does not move to the anterior or posterior sections.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, of those that are in the joints, it is not necessary to cover them with iron, for fear that they might result in contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	And if it is in the head or on the forehead, bind it with a spatula.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	But if the abscess is small, then take that with forceps and excise it from the root.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then suspend it with a hook, and drain it, and then remove it; and close the wound with stitches, and care for it until it heals.
Capitol .li.	Chapter II.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Of the incision of an abscess that occurs on the cheek or occurs in the abdomen.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Sometimes in some men, small growths appear on the abdomen of those and on other parts of the body of those same individuals, which are called fungal-like due to their similarity to fungi; the root of these is fine and the head of those is large. And often the lips of these are turned outward, and they can be small or greatly enlarged.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have seen one [case] where there were two growths on his abdomen that resembled fungi more closely, and there was no difference between them in terms of being white with a fine root.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And the lips of those [growth(s)] were inverted and split open, and moisture continuously flowed from them.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	So I incised those [growths] and found in one of them about eighteen ounces, and in the other about six ounces.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	The procedure for incising them is that you should consider whether the patient is moist and if the color of the growth is white, moist, and has a fine root. When you incise it with a broad spatula, have cautery instruments ready at hand because sometimes when the incision is made, much blood is expelled; if blood flows, cauterize it.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if you find the patient pale and fearful, beware of cutting with iron; but instead take freshly made lead foil, and strengthen it with that material, in the manner we have described; and leave that for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And then adjust in the constriction with the lead thread; thus, do not stop pulling the large piece of lead until it is severed and falls off by itself.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	And if the stone is large in size, then at the beginning of the procedure there is cause for fear and terror, especially in those within the abdomen.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	And it is possible that you can cut away half of it, and then cauterize the area so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then treat the area inside so that the wound may heal.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And be careful that you do not presume to cut a stone which is of dark color, has little sensation, and appears fixed, for that is truly cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And bring with you a remedy for inflammation for this purpose.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter II.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	On the treatment of a protrusion in the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	A protrusion in the navel can be caused by various reasons; it may be due to fractures in the spine that is above the abdomen, and you should remove the tissue or intestine as you would in other ruptures; or it may be due to blood flowing from a vein or artery as previously mentioned, or due to trapped air within it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	Here is the translation of the given sentence line by line:
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then its situation differs more violently from what we have recounted. As you press that area with your fingers, it becomes hidden, and then returns; and strongly it remains there, and the movement greatly magnifies at the entrance of bath and violent work.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	And if it is due to moisture, then it is a swelling that does not hide when you press with your hand, nor is it hardened, nor creased.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is due to blood, then with these signs the abscess appears in a declining blackness. 
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	But if it is due to soft flesh, then it is a severe abscess, large and hard, and is implanted according to a certain amount.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	But if it is due to flatulence, then the touch of it is lion-like (meaning fierce or violent).
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation on it is that you should consider whether the prominence of the navel is due to arterial blood, or venous blood, or flatulence; therefore, one must abstain from treating it, for there is fear and dread as I have taught in the chapter where I discussed abscesses caused by arteries and veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine or the membrane, then you must command the patient to have his belly bare, and lie extended; then probe around the entire circumference of the navel with a tent; then command him to lie on his back between your hands; then circle around the navel's circumference with a spatula where you probed with the tent; then extend half of the abscess upwards with a large clamp; then bind around the circumference with strong plaster or cerate and apply the binding method properly.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And then press the center of the extended abscess over the ligament and insert your finger into that area to find the intestine; and if you have found or noticed it through the ligament, now you cut open and push the intestine towards the parts inside the abdomen.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found the wound, then take that with your thumb; and cut away the excess parts of it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	And if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then circle that area, and then return to your operation; take two needles and put in them two strong threads and insert the two needles into the circuit which you have made around the abscess in a crosswise manner, making them penetrate; then stretch the abscess into four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, remove the needles and allow the area between to heal the extended flesh that will fall off on its own; or incise that which is thinning out and can be removed, then treat it with whatever ointment is needed for it to heal.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the prominence of the navel is made of soft flesh or due to moisture, then you must hollow out the abscess as we have said and drain the blood or moisture that you find in it, and then treat it with what is necessary so that the area consolidates.
Capitol .liii.	It seems like you've provided a section heading or chapter title, "Capitul .liii." which translates to "Chapter LIII" (or Chapter 53 in Arabic numerals). This indicates the start of the fifty-third chapter in a text. If you have more content from this chapter that needs translation or explanation, feel free to share it!
De curacio de cranc.	The phrase "De curacio de cranc" can be translated as:
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already said, in the division, about the type of hernia and in what manner it is treated with medicines, and that it is advisable to treat it with iron so that it does not become ulcerated; and we have mentioned a hernia generated in the thigh and precautions for its treatment.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancients said that sometimes a hernia can be surgically removed, just as in the case of a hernia located in the breasts or in the thigh, and they recommended extracting it entirely, especially when it starts small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	However, when it is old and large, it is not advisable to approach it, for I have not been able to cure any of these, nor have I seen others do so, nor has it been achieved in this manner.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation on it is when it should be done as we have said, which is that you precede by leaving the patient to purge of black bile several times, and then incise it if a noticeable swelling is found.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	Then prepare the patient with preparations in which they are placed for the operation, and then probe the area with hooks that are necessary for it; then hollow out from all sides with a good catheter to remove any remaining roots or causes of the condition.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the blood flow, and do not cut that lightly, and squeeze the areas, and wipe off the thick blood completely with your hand or with an instrument with which it is possible for you among the instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if it causes thick blood to clot in veins or arteries, then cauterize until the flow of blood stops, and then treat that area with another form of treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	Capitol .liv.
De curacio de ydropici.	For the treatment of dropsy.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already discussed, in the division, of the types of water-related dropsy, and the signs of each type, as well as the treatment with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured with iron is only the type of althitas alone, and it is not treated with iron for the type of timpanists nor for the type of yposarcha, because that would be fatal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have already treated this type of water-related dropsy in timpanists with medicines and your treatment does not improve the condition, then consider, for if the patient has already become weakened, or is suffering from another illness that resembles other types of dropsy, such as those affecting the lungs or abdomen and similar areas, then be cautious and do not treat them with iron, for there is fear over this.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	But if you see that the patient has abundant strength, and they are not suffering from any other illness except for dropsy alone, and the patient is neither a child nor an elderly person, then the method of the operation is as follows: you lift the patient between your hands, and another assistant near them presses the abdomen with their hand, forcing the water towards the region below the navel, and then take a sharp spatula according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider if the generation of dropsy is from the intestines, for when you make the incision, you must move away from the navel by the length of three fingers to the sides, on the right side towards the pelvis.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	And if the generation of dropsy is due to a disease of the liver, then your incision should be three fingers to the left of the navel. 
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of it [the ailment] is from the liver, then your incision should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And it is not necessary for your incision to be on the side on which the patient wishes to lie because the superfluities will not flow to that place freely.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then pierce the entire wound with the instrument, and insert into that section, and lift your hand with the spatula between the wound and the sphincter, and you dilate that part; and it should be about the size of a fingernail or thereabouts. 
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then pierce the bladder until the spatula reaches the empty space, which is where the water [fluid] is located. 
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then extract that and insert an instrument of which this is the form:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	And it resembles a thin silver tube; it is made of silver or iron or lion tin, at the lower part of which there is a small hole, and on the sides of it are three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; and its extremity is incised in the manner of a pen, just as you often see.
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the upper extremity is a ring, for when the instrument reaches the fluid, then that ring immediately goes over the instrument, thus allowing a moderate amount of fluid to be evacuated, for if you evacuate more than what is necessary in an hour, the patient may die due to the resolution of their animal spirit, or you may cause them to approach death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	But evacuate according to the quantity of the strength of the fluid and according to what is indicated to you by the condition of the patient, the strength of their pulse, and their overall well-being.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And then remove the instrument, and retain the fluid which is held back by the chain that catches the hole on top of the tip, reminding you to perforate it in that manner. 
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then repeat the procedure on another day if the patient can tolerate it, and extract a small quantity of water, and do this for several days in succession, and be careful to avoid mistakes until only a little water remains.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	And if you fear for the patient and leave a large quantity of water remaining, then treat that with burial in hot sand, induce sweating in a bath, and expose to the sun for a long time; and treat that with drying medicines until healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And apply cautery to the stomach, and the spleen and the liver before the extraction of the water, as I have recounted in what precedes.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter V.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	On the treatment of children who are born with unperforated urinary openings.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Sometimes some of the children are born from their mother's womb with their urinary opening not perforated (or it is very narrow or not in its proper place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, it is necessary to treat with puncture as soon as it is born using a fine and subtle spatula in the following manner:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then place in the wound a fine lead clamp and tie it there, and leave it for three days or four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when he wants to urinate, he should be undressed and allowed to do so; then return him to his previous state.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not stop the flow, it is possible that the urine passing over the area will not clear this spot.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	But for those whose passage is narrow, it should be treated with a lead dilator, as we have said, for several days until it is widened.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	But for those in whom the passage is not in its proper place, as mentioned, the cause is that from birth, the opening of the urethra is at the end of the penis, so he cannot urinate normally without lifting his penis with his hand to direct it upwards; and this does not allow for normal generation, because the sperm cannot reach the uterus correctly, which is a significant ailment.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the method of the operation is that the patient should be placed face down on his back, and then extend the head of the penis with your left hand using strong traction, and incise the tip of the penis at the location of the perforation with a sharp spatula, much like the cutting of a quill, or shave off some part so that the middle becomes similar to the head of the penis and the passage falls into its proper place as needed.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And be careful in your operation of blood flow, for you often encounter this; and hold the area where you stop the blood, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Capitol .lvi.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Of a condition that occurs on the foreskin at the head of the penis, and of corruption, blackening, and adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	White spots occur with this condition on the penis, and it is an elevation of soft flesh.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And of those, one is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	For non-malignant cases, you must suspend it with a fine thread and cut within so that the entire area is separated; then apply a poultice submerged in Egyptian ointment; afterwards, treat it with a diluting ointment until it heals.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the condition is malignant and of a leprous color, then you must apply a cautery near its beginning and its root.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	But if the condition is on the foreskin at the head of the uncircumcised penis, and one part of the condition is inside the foreskin while the other part is outside, then you must remove the part of the condition that is inside at its beginning until it is consolidated; afterwards, treat the external part, because when you treat both at the same time with the foreskin intact, it is not certain that it will not be torn.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And we have examined accidents in the genitals and on the foreskin showing blackening and corruption; therefore, you must return everything that has already turned black and what is about to corrupt or has already corrupted to its cavity; then apply over this a dressing with honey, which should be mixed with flour from crushed pomegranate peel and finely ground ashes.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	Then treat that with another cure until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	But if there is a flow of blood, then apply a lunar cautery in the following manner:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	For a beneficial cautery serves two purposes at once, that is, for blood flow and for a plague when it is corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the penis is corroded and completely destroyed, then you must insert a lead catheter into the foreskin so that the patient can urinate through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion only occurs in those whose foreskin is tight, and circumcision is not typically required; when adhesion occurs due to infection or abscess), you must gently separate them using a dull spatula until the bond is dissolved and the head of the penis is completely freed.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to distinguish those exquisitely, then you must scrape with a spatula some of the cause from the head of the penis and from the foreskin, and this is where the foreskin, when it is thin, is lightly perforated by its thinness easily.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis using a thin probe, which has already been soaked in cold water so that they do not adhere again.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then it should be treated with styptic wine until it is healed.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter LVII. 
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	Of the purification of children and the treatment for what happens to those who undergo circumcision.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution to the discontinuity like other afflictions; rather, since it is of our doing and by our will, and those for whom it is properly children, it is necessary that we perform this better operation in the easiest way possible without causing harm to their health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books because they did not use it in their laws. This is only because we have acquired it through experience. The reason I have found most artisans and surgeons to use circumcision and purification with a lancet and forceps is that they apply salves with honey and perform anointing with ointment.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have already examined all these methods and did not find a better purification using scissors and salves with honey than purification with ointment. Often, the former method leaves part of the foreskin above because the foreskin has two layers, and the lower layer remains, which requires another anointment and causes certain pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And with the cleansing which is performed by scarifications, and is digital, of which barbers use, the incision at the end of the male member is not safeguarded, for fear it enters too deeply.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	But in an operation with a nail, if you force it, you will ruin your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the umbilical cord of the child is short by nature, and many times it is born in such a way that no modification is needed, and I have seen this.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	And here is the translation line by line based on your example:
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the method of the first operation is that you should keep the child mostly still if it belongs to those who understand a little, and you only need to tie the foreskin on its penis just so, and leave it until the next day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then make him feel joyful in every way that is possible for you so that he receives the understanding. 
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then have that person lie between your hands properly prepared, and let there be no carelessness; and hide the scissors in your hand or under your foot, so that the child does not see those nor any other of the instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then insert your hand into the penis and blow into the tube, and pull it inside so that the head of the penis is set, and then clean it from whatever filth is attached to it.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then apply the marked area with double-folded wax, and then place a second ligature slightly below the first one, and then use your finger to press and indicate the site of the ligature firmly, and incise between the two ligatures.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then lift the tube slightly and extract the head of the penis; and then let the blood flow slowly, as it is better; and sprinkle powder over it and place a cloth soaked in a mixture of hen's fat cooked with freshly ground oil over the powder; and leave that on until the next day; and treat it with healing until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The form of the scissors for modification is as follows:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	When the extremities are not cut and others are cut, it is important that the key's branch is not used, and the length of both acute ends should be equal to the length of two handles equally.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	And the error in purification is that you should completely or partially remove the intrinsic chain through incision.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, you must stretch that area of the wound with your nail before the inflammation occurs at that location and incise it according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then extract that with a hook and incise that.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	And if three days have passed and the swelling remains under the foreskin as an abscess, then you should wait until the abscess ripens, and then easily lance it, and incise it according to what is prepared for you.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And be careful of the head of the penis, for it should not be harmed by this.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And then treat it with what consolidates the wound, using the powders that we have mentioned in the section on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is incised too much on the chain (likely referring to a surgical instrument or a specific part of the body), and you follow the divided parts above, this will not harm the patient.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And instead, treat it with what we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter LVIII.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction made by stones or frozen blood, or pus or flesh growths, and similar to those we have mentioned regarding the methods of treatment in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved and the retention occurs because of a stone already in the neck of the bladder, then the patient must bend over their ankles.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Then place the patient's feet on their back and extend their abdomen above their back, and have the patient hold their belly as tightly as possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Thus, the neck of the bladder is forced to expel the stone backward, so that the urine is released.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it is not dissolved by what we have said and the cause is strongly present in the patient, then you must administer extraction with an instrument called a syringe, which has the following form: It should be made of silver and have a thin hollow body, similar to a bird's quill with a thickness of about one and a half palms, and it should have a fine tube at its tip.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the method of urine extraction is as follows: take the folded cloth and tie it tightly at one end with thread or cord; insert the free ends of the cloth into the opening left by the catheter, and cut off any excess part of the cloth with scissors if necessary, but insert it forcefully into the tube. Then pull the catheter out gently while using egg white.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And place the patient on the sheet, and anoint the bladder and the penis with moist oils, olive oil, and rose water.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then insert the catheter easily so that it reaches the tip of the penis; and then bend the penis upwards to the area of the pubic bone; and then push the catheter further in there; and then continue pushing until it reaches the bladder, and this should be perceived by the patient as having reached the void space, and if it is not done according to this order, but the meat (tissue) through which it goes is twisted. 
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then extend the bile with the wool little by little, for the urine wets the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Then extract it and use the urine for treatment, apply a catheter, do not stop doing this and use a catheter until the bladder is emptied and the patient finds relief.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter .59. 
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Of the quality of cyst irrigation using clamped instruments and similar tools which are appropriate for this procedure.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When you encounter ulceration or abscess in the bladder, or congealed blood within it, or if pus is obstructed there, and you wish to distill water and medicines into it, then an instrument called a clampcedra should be used, and this is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	And here is the translation of the provided line:
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that place three wounds: two from one side, thus as it were.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning is the concave area in which something is inserted, and it depends on the quantity that obstructs it; without addition, when any cause draws out the moisture, it is drawn out, and when expelled, it is drawn out with it, and when expelled long-term, according to how it acts like clampcedra [possibly a misspelling or archaic term], in which naphtha is mixed for naval battles.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, if you want to remove moisture from the bladder, insert the end of a tube into the moisture, and pull with that what is pushed up into the parts above, for the moisture is drawn into the hollow of the tube.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then insert the tip of the catheter into the penis as we have described in the circumcision; and then expel the moisture with what you use to do so, for that moisture reaches the bladder immediately, and the patient feels it.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The form of the catheter used to catheterize the bladder is as follows:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it should be made of silver or brass, with the tip resembling a small feather, and leave a hollow canal inside.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And then take a bladder of an animal, and place the moisture you want to introduce into the bladder inside it, and then tie both ends tightly with double thread, and warm that moisture over fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then insert the tip of the catheter into the penis.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then press your hand on the bladder containing the moisture with moderate force so that the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	But if a bladder is not available, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle out of it; pierce it all around its circumference; then insert strong thread into those holes so that it is woven through; then add the circle in such a way that it is attached to form a pouch, and place inside it the moisture, oils, and waters that you wish to use.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then you place it on the instrument and do so in the same way as you did with the bladder, expressing with your hand inside so that the moisture reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	It appears you've provided a section or chapter marker, likely from an older text or document, formatted as ".lx." which in Roman numerals translates to 60. Without additional context or content that follows this marker, I can't provide further translation or explanation. If you have more text or need clarification on what might follow such a marker, please feel free to share!
De extraccio de peyra.	On the extraction of stones.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already discussed in the division the types of stones and their treatment with medicines, and the difference between stones formed in the kidneys and those formed in the bladder, and the signs of each.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have discussed the stone for which surgery and incision are performed.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the stone properly formed in the bladder is that which is lodged in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And I will narrate that with clear exposition and abbreviation.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Thus, it is said that stones formed in the bladder predominantly affect children; and among the signs of this condition is that the urine excreted from the bladder is similar to water in its fineness, and sand appears in it; and the patient rubs his penis, often feels pain, and then urination occurs; and with this, you understand the cause of these symptoms.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And it is the rule for the treatment of children who have reached fourteen years; and it is a difficult cure in the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	However, in young people it may occur because it is among those [who are susceptible].
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And for that one in which the stone is larger and the cure is more difficult; And if it is small, it is contrary to that one.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, when we come to the treatment of this, we begin by cleansing the patient with a catheter that extracts all the slit which is in their intestines; for that slit sometimes prevents the discovery of the stone during the examination.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then the patient should be lifted by their feet and shaken gently so that the stone descends into the neck of the bladder, or jumps to another place several times.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then prepare that poultice between your hands, and the patient's hands should be placed on their abdomen, so that the bladder is entirely directed downwards towards the lower parts.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then wash it and clean it all outside.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Therefore, if you feel the stone in the space, then you should immediately proceed with surgery on it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you do not reach all the way with your touch, then you must anoint your left index finger with oil, if the patient is a child, or your middle finger if they are a mature adult, and insert it into their anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And wash the stone inside while your finger is still there.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And gently guide that small stone little by little into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And then press on that area with your finger, and push it out towards the outer parts from the location of the section.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the attendant to press the bladder with their hand; and command another attendant to extend the testicles upward with their right hand, and with their other hand hold back the scrotum which is below the testicles, in the area where the incision will be made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then insert a spatula bent at an angle, which has the following form: 
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And you split in him what is between the buttocks and the thighs, not at the middle spot, but rather towards the side of the left thigh; and make the incision on that stone with your finger inside the buttock, and let the incision be transverse so that the outer part of the incision is wide and the inner part narrow according to how much the stone protrudes from him as possible, and not more, for you strongly compress your finger which is in the buttock, the stone should be cut off by force.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that there are some stones which have angles and edges, making the extraction difficult because of this.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And of those, some resemble a grain, being round, and their extraction is easier.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Therefore, if it has angles and edges, apply [an instrument] into the fissure.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not removed by force, then you must attach a tool to it, or press on it properly with an edge that is like a file used to scrape over the stone without slipping off; or introduce beneath it a subtle instrument with a curved end.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	And if you cannot do that, then widen the wound slightly, and if you see blood flow, cut it off strongly with ground glass.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	And if the stone is more than one, at the beginning you press your hand to the mouth of the bladder, and then incise upon it; and then push a small one out near there; and similarly do so if they are more than two stones.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the stone is very large, then it is unwise to incise with a large cut, for you cause one of two things to happen to the patient: either they die or they become subject to continuous urinary dribbling, because the area does not fully heal.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	But administer the expulsion of what is embedded inside, or extract in the fracture with scissors what needs to be removed in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Therefore, once you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with pieces of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen it thus.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place over it a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in rose oil and warm water, so that the swelling may be allowed to subside.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And then recline the patient on their side, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when you have loosened that area, wash the spot with water and some oil, then treat it with diafinikon ointment and abazilicon ointment until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	More if in the wound an accident of abscess occurs that is hot and corrosive, and it resembles blood congealed in the bladder, causing urination to be obstructed (and this is known by the discharge of blood with urine), then insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains, it provokes corruption and putrefaction of the bladder.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then wash the wound with sweet wine, water, and salt, and apply an opposing treatment to all kinds, using what is appropriate for the healing until it is cured.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And throughout the entire healing process, you must keep both thighs open and apply the medicines that are placed on the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and is in the meat of the penis, embedded within it, and urination is obstructed, then treat this with what I recommend before resorting to surgery, for many times this condition is accused of requiring surgery; and now I have explained this, which is that you should take an oiled iron probe, of which this is the form:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	from the triangular extremity, sharp, inserted into wood.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And then take honey, and apply it with that to the penis after removing the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then insert the instrument into the penis, penetrating easily until the perforator reaches the stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And rotate the perforator with your hand on that stone little by little, and you will pierce through until the other end penetrates; for the urine will then be released.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then press your hand on the part where the stone is broken outside of the penis, because that area is constricted and will be cleaned out with urine, and the patient will be healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	But if this treatment is not suitable for you due to some reason that prevents you from doing so, then apply honey below the stone and more honey above the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then incise over the stone on that penis between two bindings.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then extract it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then loosen the bandage and modify the clotted blood that has formed in the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to keep the bandage of the stone in place with wax so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other bandage above it for when the wax near the protrusion of the stone is loosened, the chain returns to its place and covers the wound.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for this reason, when you remove the wax above, you must lift the chain to the parts above, or return it in its proper position, and cover the wound as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter LXI.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the extraction of stones from women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Stones in women rarely form.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	But if a stone does occur in any of them, then the cure is difficult, and it is prohibited by many methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One reason is that the woman's body is often delicate.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that you do not find a woman who is well knowledgeable to describe herself to the doctor when she is chaste, or is among women having husbands.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is that you will not find a woman well versed in this art, especially in this operation by hand.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the location of the incision above the stone in women is further from the location of the stone, for which you need a deeper incision, and there is fear in that.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	But if necessity forces you to do so, then you must take a female doctor who is well knowledgeable, though she is rarely found.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	But if you are deprived of that, then seek someone who is quite skilled and subtle, or present a female midwife well experienced in women's affairs, or a woman who has some knowledge of this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Therefore, have that person present, and command them to do everything you instruct, starting with the examination of the hymen; this is done to check if the woman is a virgin, then they must insert their finger into her vagina and feel the hymen.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Therefore, if you find it, press on it with your finger, and then command her to sit down on it.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	But if she is not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the patient's vagina and examine the area where the hymen should be, placing her left hand on the bladder and compressing it with good pressure.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Therefore, if you find it, then you must gradually pull it from the opening of the bladder towards the area near the thigh using all your strength until you reach the root of the thigh.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then incise at that spot in the middle of the thigh where you feel the resistance of the bone from any side, and insert the stone into that part, and do not let the stone be removed from there.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the incision should be small at the beginning; then insert the probe into that incision, and if you feel the stone, now adjust the incision according to the amount you know the stone will be expelled from there.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And know that there are different kinds of stones: some of them are small and large, sharp and rough, long and round, and having ridges.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore, you should know the various types of it by what you mean concerning what you want. 
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you see blood flow, apply powdered vitriol to the location and leave it there for an hour until the bleeding stops, and then return to your operation once the stone is expelled.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And have you prepare the instruments that are used in the extraction of stone from men, so that you may be assisted by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you see a flow of blood and know that the bleeding comes from the artery that has been cut, then apply powder to the area and press it with pillows and tight binding, but do not repeat this; leave the stone and do not extract it, for fear that the patient may die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	Then treat the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	When the sharpness of the blood has subsided over several days and the area has dried, then return to your operation before the stone becomes embedded.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter LXII.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On the section for treating an incarcerated hernia.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	An incarcerated hernia is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white membrane that lies beneath the spermatic cord containing the testicle, and this membrane is called the tunica vaginalis.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	Here is the translation of the given sentence line by line:
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which affects the testicles, because this material is infused into those areas, and sometimes it occurs due to percussion made upon the testicles.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this humidity has various colors, for the color of it may incline to yellow or bloody, or red, or be black and feculent, or be clear white, and these are what exist.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which it is known where this water accumulation is are these: for if it is in the white cippus that we have mentioned, then the swelling is round, slightly elongated longitudinally like an egg shape, and the genetius appears, because the humidity contains all around.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the humidity is in the proper pan nicol [likely referring to a specific anatomical area or organ], then the abscess is round with a part of the egg, and for this reason it is thought to be another egg.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the testicles and the white skin, then apply a poultice there. 
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And when you want to know the color of the humor, then you expose the color of the humor in the abscess by inserting a probe whose form is previously prepared; and according to what is seen on the tip of the probe, judge of what is inside it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	And when we come to the treatment with iron, then it is necessary to command the patient to be in a sweat if that is possible for you, and turn the body of the patient completely. 
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And then lay him down on his back on some kind of support slightly elevated, and place a soft cloth underneath.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then sit on the left side of him, and command the assistant to stand on his right side, who should extend their arm from one of the two sides to the groin area and to the part near the navel.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a wide spatula and split the groin along the middle length towards the penis.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And make the incision exactly equally distant from the line where you should cut the skin of the groin until you reach the white membrane.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And pull on that area, observe carefully, and be cautious so that you do not penetrate it; and when you are pulling, make sure it is suspended with the most delicate touch, and examine it thoroughly with your pulling to the extent possible.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then pierce the swollen area full of water with a wide incision, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate the two lips of the incision with hooks, and extend the foreskin over the parts above; do not touch the chain of the spermatic cords, and cut the foreskin in such a manner as is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And cut that part entirely or in pieces, especially its thin layer, because if you do not examine the incision thoroughly, there is no guarantee that the fluid will not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	However, if during the operation you process it from outside its chain, then after you have completed the incision of the foreskin, return it inside, and then suture the two lips of the spermatic cords together, and then treat it as you would other wounds until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the testicle corrupted by another disease, then you must tie off the vessels that are on the suspensory ligament, remove the testicle, and then treat it as we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	However, if the fluid is accumulated in two separate parts, then know that there are two hernias; therefore, incise that part similarly to how you did in the other one; and if it appears to you that an operation is necessary, then perform it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then you clean the blood, and insert into the incisions wool soaked in oil or oiled wool; and place on top another piece of wool that you have soaked in wine and oil, and spread that over both groins and the navel area; and place above folded cloths and pillows, and bind those with a bandage according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And then two cloths are taken and filled with carded wool according to this shape; and the ends are made with which pressure is applied using a cloth or wet wool, and they are attached with ties in the waistband of the pants, and one end should go from the buttocks between the two, and the second should attach at the crotch area, and two ends over each thigh and two ends on both knees, and all the bindings should be adjusted in the waistband of the pants.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with cautery instead of surgical incision with a knife; and you should take a delicate scalpel-like cautery and use it to incise the chain of the groins, and ignite it as we have recommended between which the white membrane containing the fluid is exposed, and then you take a cautery according to this form:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	And it is similar to Greek lettering. 
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then pierce with that instrument, and heat it so that all the moisture is expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then extend the instrument with hooks, and squeeze with hooks, and cauterize with a subtly heated cautery; and cut as much of it as you can until you remove all of it; and be careful of the area so that the fire does not touch it.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is safer and causes less bleeding, and is better than an operation with incision.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if during the operation or during the cautery or bleeding, some complication arises that opposes you, then you must treat whatever complication arises for you with the appropriate treatment as mentioned.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the patient is weak and does not tolerate a second operation due to its horror, then administer piercing as I recommend here; this is when you are certain, based on what we have said about the signs, that the hernia is acute.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then you must have the patient sit on some raised stool, then pierce the abscess at its lowest part with a blunt spatula, and leave the puncture open according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And let the opening be wide through which all the water flows out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And then place your hand over the area tightly and press it, so that the remaining water flows out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then treat it until the plague is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if there is an obstruction to the discharge of water at that time, you pierce it: this is done only when the white membrane in the opening of the wound causes an obstacle and prevents the流出，此时你需要将探针或提取水液的工具放入伤口中，其形状如前所述；或者在伤口的压力处放置一个小装置。
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And know that the water returns, and it is added again after about six months or around that time; and when it is added again, then it should be punctured according to the same method, for thus the patient will spend their days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter LXIII.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	Of sectioning over a fleshy hernia and its cure.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in the sectioning of this hernia, there is fear of causing fatal harm in major procedures; therefore, in my view, it is better to dismiss it and be saved by that better option.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I am recalling the operation on that and the specifics of the abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, I say that abscesses form in bodies where the veins are involved, and this happens for various reasons: either due to an acute bitter excess that is poured into the veins, or due to percussion.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and it is not accompanied by pain, and it is a severe abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And often the abscess is calcified, of which the color is dark, and there is no sensation in it.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes it is caused by the constriction of arteries, and by the inflammation of those areas as already mentioned in the recall of it, or by the inflammation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	And what is caused by the inflammation of arteries is known through the dispersion of the abscess when you compress it with your fingers; and it does not need to be touched.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	And what is caused by the swelling of a vein should not be dispersed; rather, it must be compressed with the aforementioned method.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that on this kind of case a section may be made and on the other flesh; and you incise the cord of the genitals, then stretch the scrotum upwards, and extract what is in the white sac, release the suspensorium of the vessels, ligature them, and you incise the suspensorium after you have freed that from all parts of the scrotum.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	And if the scrotum is already consolidated with those fleshy parts, then you must extract the scrotum and incise it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adhesion due to some cause within the sac, or between the vessels, then you must free all of that adhesion and incise it with a circular incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	But if there is a growth of flesh in the area of the adhesion that is behind, then you must incise all of that which belongs to it and extract the scrotum as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And when your operation is completed, then fill the wound with wool infused in oiled wine; and afterward care for it with other treatments until it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	Capitol .lxiv.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	For the given sentence:
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this illness, it is done out of fear of that which is preceded by memory.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, we must describe the operation that they perform first.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And it is said that you must place the patient on an elevated chair; then pull up the suspensorium of the testicles to their proper places; and then tie the ligaments of the genitals with your fingers using cloths that are prepared for this purpose; and let those other assistants who are with you, extend them with a strong extension.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then incise with a sharp, flat spatula through a transverse section in the right place where the vessels are exposed.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then squeeze from all sides as we have said in the extraction of artery worms, which are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then insert into those an needle on which is doubled thread, and tie that at the first of the places where you encounter veins, and tie that another time at the end of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then incise those in the middle part with a straight cut according to the length of the body, and extract what has been added by the foul and corrupted humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then treat the wound with a treatment for other wounds in which you want pus to be generated so that the vessels fall out from which you will bleed one of two veins, for it is not harmful by doing so.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	But if you accidentally cut all the vessels, then it is necessary to remove the testicles or for the testicles to wither due to the vessels, because they are deprived of all nourishment by the cutting of the vessels, and that they be made infertile, or to wither so that they do not function properly.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter 65.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	On the treatment of intestinal hernias.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is due to a tear that extends from the spine over the abdomen towards the inguinal region of the belly, so that the intestines come out through that rupture and affect some of the intestines.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the spine or due to an exertion by the patient, and these two types occur for various reasons: by impact, by jumping, by shouting, by lifting something heavy, or by similar causes.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of this, when it is due to an extension of the hernia, is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time, and does not happen suddenly, and it is an abscess of equal size within which the prepuce compresses the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of it is when there is a sectioning of the spleen, for at the beginning it causes sudden severe pain; and there appears an abscess that looks different from the usual appearance around the area, and this is due to the protrusion of the intestine, and its body extends beyond the spleen.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And sometimes the intestine protrudes through the membrane, and this type of intestinal hernia is called zirbal.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And sometimes it is caused by gas, and sometimes the intestine splits open, and here it becomes trapped, causing great distress to the patient, and at times it leads to a severe and significantly worse pain when pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of this kind of illness with iron, there is fear, for which reason it must be avoided in that case.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the method of the operation for this is that you command the patient to push the intestine back into its cavity with their hand; if it obeys and returns, then have them lie on their back between your hands, and lift their chest.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then place the cord which secures the cord of the testicles above, and cut the cord of the testicles entirely along its length; then insert two hooks into the edges of the incision according to what is needed to open the incision with those.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the section is according to the quantity that it is possible for you to remove from it so that the pus may be evacuated.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then stretch that sac in which the cord of the testicles is placed, until the hard white part of each side is uncovered.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	And then you insert your finger into the area where the testicle is located, between the white sac that is beneath the spermatic cord and the second sac, separating them from the adhesion that is behind the scrotum.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	Then grasp the spermatic cord with your hand towards the outer parts, and with this action extend the white sac upwards using your left hand, and lift the scrotum with the sac to the section area; and command the assistant to stretch the scrotum upwards while you dissolve the adhesion behind it completely.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And examine with your fingers to ensure there is no cause for the intestine being enclosed in the hard white sac.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	But if you find any cause for it, then you push that part back into the abdomen below.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then you take a needle on which is wound a thick thread made of seven threads, and insert it through the back of the sac, which is below the spermatic cord, where the section lies; and then cut the ends that protrude from the thread until they are four threads, and then arrange some of them in a figure resembling a cross; and tie with this the sac we have mentioned that is beneath the spermatic cord with a strong binding on both sides.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then wrap the ends of the veins and tie them tightly with a strong ligature to prevent any of the vessels that are bleeding from causing any further harm, so that an abscess does not form as a result.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And again place a second ligature according to the first ligature, about three fingers away; then between these two ligatures, leave as much of the cord that extends from below the scrotum as the width of one finger, and cut off all the remaining part in a circular manner, and remove the egg.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then make an incision below the scrotum where blood and pus will flow, as we have described in what we have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then apply wool soaked in oil and place it on the wound; administer the ligature that we have described (and sometimes the white cord is cauterized, which we mentioned at the beginning of the section on blood flow, as this often occurs); leave the ligature until it falls off by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	But if the removal of it is delayed, then warm water should be poured over it and placed on it until it falls off as we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the wound with another method of treating wounds until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter LXVI.
De hernia ventosa.	From the text provided and its context, it seems like the language is an archaic form of Romance language, likely influenced by medieval Latin or Old French. The phrase "De hernia ventosa" can be translated as:
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, no one has been bold enough to attempt its cure with iron.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first ones said that it is done as we have recounted in the hernia case with thread; which means that you tie the vessels near the section where it can be done easily for him; and then dry in the middle area around the abscess, using this to open that, so that the vessels fall into place.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And treat the plague as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter LXVII.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Of the disruption that is made in the ankles.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Sometimes, as we have said, a rupture occurs in the ankles, and you should examine the area.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And do not attribute any cause of the hernias to the groin; and if you do attribute a cause, it is minimal; and it returns at all times.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	But if the time with this condition is prolonged, there is a tight fissure in the groin through which the hernia descends into the groin; and this happens due to the extension of the groin, as we have said, which occurs when the groin is stretched, then softened, and the area becomes inflamed, and you should examine it.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the treatment of it is with cautery, as was mentioned earlier in the description of it.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And sometimes it is treated with fire according to this method: the patient lies on their back between your hands, and then you dry the area of the rupture where there are inflammations by examining and drying it along its width according to the length of three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then stretch the white cloth that is under the belt so that it is uncovered. 
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the probe and place it over the prominent part of the spine, and press that against the front of the abdomen.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then mark the two prominent points at the ends of the spine's segment, and align them with each other using a suture. 
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then extract the extremity of the vein, and do not incise the entire circumference, nor extend the wound, nor cause any other damage as I will teach you in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then treat that with the treatment of wounds, and when you incise the abscesses, cleanse that area and restore the wound before it solidifies; for the skin contracts and the prominence of the rupture is not adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cautery is better in this area, for it is more conducive to healing.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter LXVIII.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On the softening of the spermatic cord.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Often, the spermatic cord is softened in some men because the flesh between them is softened, and it is beneficial for their condition.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore, it is necessary for the one who is engaged in the treatment to make the patient lie on their back, and incise the entire softened cord over the natural cord; then sew the two edges together with stitches.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you wish, at the beginning soften the excess of the loosened ligament with three or four boiling treatments and a firm suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then cut between the sutures; and then treat for the healing of other wounds until it is healed and the pus has drained.
Capitol .lxix.	Capitol .lxix.
De castracio.	From the context provided and the structure of the sentences, it seems that the text is a medieval medical treatise describing various treatments and diagnoses. Here's my translation for the given sentence:
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that according to our law, castration is excommunicated, but for a reason it is legitimate for me to remind you of this in this book; and there is no need to remember it except in two ways, one of which is so that doctors may have knowledge when they are asked about it, knowing the cure for those to whom it happens; and the other way is that we often need to castrate other animals for our benefit from them, such as horses, bulls, pigs, and similar animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And thus I say that castration is performed in two ways: either by atrophy or by incision and severing.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	But in the one that is done by atrophy, the method of the operation is to make the animal soak in hot water until its genitals are softened and become limp and hang down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	Then take them with your hand while they are still dissolved and do not let them appear to the touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	But in castration performed by incision and severing, you must hold the animal and press the cord of its testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And then apply the suspension device, and make an incision on each bone with a cut between two joints. 
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then incise those pus pockets that you have squeezed out.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not leave any cause on those with gout except the subtle gout that is on the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of castration is better, which is done by atrophy, because atrophy leaves no cause from the testicles for the animal to desire mating.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And then treat the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter LXX.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in men occurs in two ways: one is when it appears in the space along the spermatic cord, between two testicles, where a female genitalia-like figure appears, complete with hair.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And sometimes urine flows from that spot along the spermatic cord.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In women, it is of one kind: the female genitalia above the vagina appears as two male testicles slightly to the right side, resembling the foreskin and two testicles of a man.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the cure is of three types: two for men and one type for women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is necessary that you incise those tight tissues so that the swelling of that area escapes, and then treat them with the cure for other ailments.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second type for men, where you urinate from an area in the region of the testicles, there is neither cure nor operation for it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	On swelling and protruding flesh caused by conditions in women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Swelling appears tightly due to natural causes, within which it is compressed and requires careful attention; and sometimes it is enlarged in some women to such an extent that it spreads similarly as in men and can even affect intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Then it is necessary that you remove the excess swelling with your hand or with scissors and incise it.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not delay in making the incision, especially near the area of the vulva, so that it does not result in a flow of blood.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And then treat that with the treatment for the sores until it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	New flesh is flesh that grows in the wound of the mother until it fills that space, and often it appears on the outer parts resembling a tail (and for this reason some early physicians called it “tail disease”); therefore, we must incise it as we would slowly cut a lint, and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter LXXII.
De curacio de alratica.	On the treatment of arthritis.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Arthritis is when the joint of the female is not perforated, or the passage is small. 
E es o natural o accidental.	And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	And accidental is due to illness that has preceded it, and this is caused either by improperly adjusted flesh or by a subtle or thick foreign body.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it is caused either in the womb of the mother, or on its sides, or on its upper pus area, or on its lower pus area, and you prohibit coitus, pregnancy, and childbirth, and strictly forbid menstruation. 
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the knowledge of that is gained by observing the midwife, if the obstruction is visible, treat it directly; but if it is not visible, then you search for it with your fingers or with a probe.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	And if the obstruction is by subtle wind and it is located near the two lips, then you should puncture and break that area.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And you place pillows under both lips (likely referring to the labia), and then place your index fingers of both hands inside.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman is on her back, her thighs spread apart, and then spread the two lips with force so that that subtle barrier is broken and the obstruction is opened. 
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take wool and soak it in oil, place that on the area, and guard the person for a day so that the incised area does not become stiff.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	And if the swelling is large and thick, then you must incise it with a broad scalpel or with a myrtle leaf.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	But if the obstruction is due to flesh, then suspend it with a hook and incise it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And use the medicines that stop blood flow from bites, such as agaric, dragon's blood, and enses, applied with egg white.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a wide lead cannula so that the affected area does not become stiff slightly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And keep it for several days and administer an ointment of ash.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And then it should be treated with the other method of consolidation until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes it happens in the natural formation of other flesh, and then you must incise it according to this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	And if this is due to chronic abscesses, the chronic abscesses which are in the breast should not be treated with iron in any manner.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter LXXIII.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	For the given sentence:
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	When hemorrhoids are recognized as the openings of small veins through which blood continuously flows; and when these hemorrhoids become old, they harden.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already said in the division the types of those and the signs of those, and to say thus those that receive cure and those that do not receive cure.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore, I say that for hemorrhoids and tumors when they are in the lower part of the rectum and do not appear to the senses, then surgery should not be performed on them.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those which are in the openings of the mother where one feels pain, are those that are treated.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And it is necessary that you place the woman in cold water and then extend the thighs with scissors or with a rough cloth, and incise them with the knives.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then sprinkle on those areas the flow of blood with one of the masticatory astringent powders, such as oak and similar to these.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then cover their feet for an hour, and then place them in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the flow of blood persists, then soak her in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate peels and walnuts and similar items.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And then take flour of oats and mix it with honey and sweet wine and make a plaster with that on his back.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the blood is congealed, it is good; otherwise, attach two cupping glasses and perform scarification on the nipples.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take wool and soak it in the juice of coriander or in the juice of figs or in the juice of plantain with fermented wine and apply it to the area; then treat the area with ointments until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	However, be careful with what is strictly observed; you should inscribe what appears to you from the second I have mentioned in the same manner. 
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And treat that which is inside so it may be healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	It seems like you've provided a chapter or section heading from an ancient text, specifically "Capitol .lxxiv." which translates to "Chapter Seventy-Four" in English. This indicates the start of Chapter Seventy-Four in whatever treatise or document it belongs to. If you have more content from this chapter that needs translation or explanation, feel free to provide it!
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	This line appears to be in an archaic form of a Romance language, likely related to medieval Latin or Old French. Here is the translation into English:
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already mentioned these diseases and the types of them and the signs of them, and their treatments in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And I must speak in this treatise about an abscess that appears in the breast when it is one of those abscesses that collect pus, and if you want to know how the operation with iron is performed.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Then you must consider whether the pain of the abscess in its beginning is acute with percussion and phlegm and fever, and sometimes it reddens and if you press on it, then do not treat it with puncture, and cure it with that which aids maturation until the acuteness of the symptoms subsides.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And now you must place the woman on a bench that has two supports; she should recline on her back and position her feet toward the lower part of the abdomen, with her thighs spread apart, and place her arms under her head, and bind them together with a suitable bandage.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	Then the midwife should follow the correct method and administer the instrument with which the opening of the mother is widened, the form of which will be detailed in the following sections.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And when you wish to administer this instrument, you must insert it gently into the entrance of the mother's womb, ensuring that the part of the instrument inserted into the mother does not exceed the entrance of the womb and causes discomfort to the patient.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	But if the instrument is larger than the opening of the womb, then you must place pillows on the fabric covering the opening of the womb so that no instrument can enter the opening of the womb.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And you must place the thread that runs through the instrument above and have the assistant hold the instrument and rotate the thread until the opening of the womb is open.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the inflammation appears, and it is touched with the hand, and it is swollen and moist, then you must dry that area by cauterizing it with a spatula.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the pus is drained, then you must apply to the wound a cloth soaked in oiled rue or oil with some astringency; and place a compress on the incision at the opening of the womb.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And place outside the womb and on the perineum clean wool soaked in water in which mallows have been boiled.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then it should be treated for about two days with an ointment that you should apply until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And sometimes the wound and the affected area are washed with water and honey, and then with water in which root of lily or long Solomon's seal is boiled, and then return to the ointment.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the disease is inside the large intestine, then you must abstain from treating it with iron, instead curing it with what we have said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Capitol .lxxv.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach the midwives in what manner the unwell embryos are treated when they present a non-natural figure.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	It is necessary that the midwife recognize at the beginning the figure of a natural childbirth by its signs, and this is when you see the woman expressing herself through her expressions and desiring to smell the air, and upon this she is illuminated by what is happening during the birth, and hastens the emergence of the embryo. At this time, you know that this birth follows the natural figure, and it is the emergence of it on its head, and secondly with the navel either suspended or hanging down.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore, when you see those signs, then it is necessary that the belly be compressed so that the embryo descends easily, for when they descend on their head, they come out secondly, and are cleansed of those excesses with a good cleansing.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	However, that which differs from this birth is unnatural and not praiseworthy, for when the embryo is born on its feet and its body comes out before its head and its feet, or one of its hands, or its foot, or its head and its hand, or to its belly, and it is quickly turned on its neck, resembling those unpraiseworthy figures.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	When there is a necessary cause, it is essential that the midwife be wise and subtle in all those matters, and that she guard against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And I am showing all the figures of those [conditions], and what nature is in them so that they are signified by this and stand upon this.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the seed is expelled upon his head by natural exercise, and if it strongly affects the woman and occurs in a difficult part, and sometimes the power of it is already weakened, then this substance should be applied, or that women have it, and the seed should be evaporated with fenugreek juice and with moist herbs.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then insert the midwife between the shoulder blades and split it with that second tool, or scrape it with her nail until you remove what is inside of it from moisture.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the woman’s abdomen until the fetus descends.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	And if it does not descend, then the woman should be treated with a mixture of psyllium mucilage and fenugreek mucilage.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	Then command the one attending her to compress her and induce sneezing with pepper; and hold her mouth and nose for about an hour, for the fetus will be expelled soon.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if the two hands of the fetus come out first at the beginning, then you must reduce them back little by little with ease.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	But if it does not obey the instrument, then place the woman on a stool and lift her feet up, and then drop the stool onto the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall due to the jolt.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the hands are not returned inside and the fetus dies, then cut those [hands] and extract the remains of the fetus or tie the body of the fetus to its hand with a cloth and pull it out gently, for it will come out easily.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	Of the embryo's excretion upon its feet. 
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When you are on top of the patient's feet, then you must push them down, and then reduce the fold little by little, and then equalize that area, and then take one foot and stretch it little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	When you have entered between the thighs, then you command the patient to strain, and induce that expulsion with caution, for it will be forcefully expelled if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not forcefully expelled by what we have recommended, then you slowly return the fold until you place it back in its natural position, for it will be forcefully expelled with a gentle insertion.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is prevented by everything we have recommended, then take some alum and dissolved gum, and pound all of it in the mortar with good pounding, and then line the woman’s womb with this mixture, at the lowest part of her abdomen.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And then make the patient sit in tepid water until it reaches the hypochondria (the area on either side of the upper abdomen below the ribs).
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when you see that the parts of him are softened, then perform fumigation with myrtle and place it under him.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when you have the sub-fumigation for an hour, then make them sit on a chair, and then cause that person to sneeze and open their mouth wide, and lift them up from there, and press the lower part of their abdomen with gentle compression, because the substance will be expelled quickly.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the fetus will come out according to this form, then you gradually insert your fingers into its small hands; and then the woman should be laid on her back with her feet hanging down, and she should be sitting on something low, and hold onto her own hands.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And then press on the abdomen of the patient little by little, and then extract what is under their feet from between the ears into which it was prepared at the part below them.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the fart is not expelled, then take their feet and move them with a forceful motion, and then press the area above the hypochondriac region little by little until the gas rises to the upper parts.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And then insert your fingers and gently widen the small area, and command the woman to strain inward as the fetus is being extracted.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Extract the fetus longitudinally while holding one of its limbs.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Attempt to reduce the dislocation of his hand, but if you cannot do so, then raise the woman and let her go [in the sense of allowing her to move or be repositioned]. 
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if they cannot go, then make the patient lie on the ground, and shake their thighs with a strong shaking, and then administer plasters which are made from and consist of mucilages.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the childbirth has begun, then let her sit on a chair, and immediately focus on the reduction of the hand, aligning the child according to its natural position, and make the woman sneeze and command her to compress herself inward until she is exhausted.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Exuding from the wound on his neck, spreading its fluids and the surface of it is toward his mother's side.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	It is necessary that the midwife hold the hand of the child and then turn it little by little, so that it may come out easily.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is ready and has been mixed equally, then place on the wound what we have recommended of oil and poultices.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	Then command him to vomit little by little, and once you have done that, place the mixture in a pot and instruct him to lean over the right side, then command him to compress himself; and make him sneeze with the condition.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The prepared fetus is placed on the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When dealing with horrors from the mother according to this method, be cautious, and then incise the second layer with your fingernail until the moisture is drained.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the fetus is suspended by its face and neck, then you should incise the umbilical area so that it is not retained and dies.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	Then push the fetus inward towards the parts until you place it in the position that is needed, and instruct the woman to compress herself several times, and it will be expelled gently with effusion, if God so wills.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Here is the translation of the given line:
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And among those, even if they are multiplied, a second is counted, and they are separated by a siphon, distinguishing them within the ligament at the navel of each of these; and sometimes they are expelled as though it were done by a light natural secretion, and sometimes they come out due to an unhealthy expulsion, just as we have recounted.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if some births are difficult and you assist in the childbirth leading to what we have mentioned about unnatural positions, then treat those cases as we have recounted.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is skilled and does this with ease and subtlety, and with patience, and is inventive according to every shape according to what is prepared of the instrument leading to health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remembrance of that which is formed in the womb from embryos and are aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Here is the translation of the given text line by line into English:
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all of this must be known by the midwife who has that small resemblance to this, and thus applies herself to it with what is necessary.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Capitol .lxxvi.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	For the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you treat a dead fetus using what we have said in the section on medication and it is not expelled, and you are forced to use manual operation, then you must consider whether the woman is of sound health and not suffering from any conditions that could lead to her harm.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	And now it is necessary that the woman be placed face down on the bed on her back, and that her head be inclined to one side and her thighs be elevated.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the minister should hold it from both sides or bind it with a bandage so that the body does not extend during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	Then you moisten the mouth of the mother with humid oils and with a mucilage of fennel, fenugreek, and its seeds.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	Then anoint the midwife's hand with those oils and mucilages, then gently insert her hand into the mother, and then search with her hand for the place where she can grasp the fetus with her fingers.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And here is what to do: then you consider if the fetus is positioned to descend head-first, and then you place your fingers in its ears, or in its neck, or in its mouth, or in its palate, or under its chin, or in its armpit, or near its ribs, or below its hypochondrium.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	But if it is descending feet-first, then [you should grasp] in the ankles or in the middle of the legs.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And it is necessary to hold the hook with the right hand, and place its curvature in the area between the fingers of the left hand, then gently insert the hand so that the hook can be placed in one of those areas we have mentioned, until you reach the cause of obstruction.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then place and keep in the appropriate position another pillow, or a third if necessary, so that the traction is equal, and not just according to its straightness.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And it should be wrapped entirely so that the excretion from it is eased just as is done in dental procedures for the extraction of it.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And it is necessary to introduce into it what is between them so that the extension is softened; and if any part of it is retained, then it must be that the midwife anoints some of her fingers with oil and carefully inserts those and twists with them what is retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	So if part of the fetus is stuck, then the pillows should be adjusted to a more suitable position; do this until the entire fetus is delivered. 
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	And if one hand is dislocated in front of the other and cannot be reduced due to the contraction of the limb, then a cloth must be wrapped around it; then extract that part until everything is protruded, and incise either at the joint of the hand or at the elbow.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And thus you must do the same on the other hand and on both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	And if the head of the boil is large, or you encounter constriction during exudation, or if there is water tightly bound in the head, then you must insert between the fingers a pointed instrument and split the head to drain the water, or use an instrument called “alundat,” the form of which will be shown with the forms of other instruments in the chapter that follows this one.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And similarly, if the boil has a large head by nature, then you must incise it with a scalpel, or take hold of it with an alundat as we have said; and then extract the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head has exuded and is constricted, you should split it open so that the moisture within the feet may be released.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	But if it is not complicated and does not require exudation, then you should incise the head as soon as possible according to what is feasible for you.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the lower part of the abdomen is abscessed or is dropsical, then you must pierce it to allow the moisture within to drain out.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	And if the swelling is on their feet, then its attraction is slight and its direction towards the mouth of the vein is also slight.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	If the abdomen and feet are constricted, then you must extract that which is wrapped around your hand with cloth, and cut into the abdomen and feet so that what is inside may flow out. 
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the opening of the womb is constricted by an abscess that has occurred at the mouth of it, then it should not be disturbed; first, you must administer a effusion of greasy and moist substances.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And administer plasters; and continue treating the patient with waters that soften and moisturize.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the puncture is on the patient's side, then if possible, it should be drained; and administer what we have said to the fresh wound.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if this is not possible, then it should be cut into pieces and extracted.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And it is necessary that you do not leave any cause within the second layer.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all of your operation, then administer what we have said about the treatment for the swellings that occurred from the wound.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if bleeding occurs, then immerse in styptic waters and administer the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have seen a woman whose fetus in the womb was dead, and then she became pregnant again, and another fetus died in her.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happened to someone after a long time that a swelling occurred in their groin; and it swelled inside where a cut was made, and they began to discharge pus.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called to his care, and treated him for a long time, but the plague did not subside.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I placed some strongly adhesive plasters on him, and drew out a bone from him, and after several days, I drew out another bone; and I was very amazed because there were no bones in his belly.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then I thought that they were the bones of a dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then I treated the plague, and extracted many bones from him; the woman existed in her own dispositions within, and lived in such a way for a long time, occasionally moving slightly. 
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I do not intend to be strange, but rather because in this lies knowledge and assistance for the doctor who administers treatment with their hands.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of an instrument with which the mother is cut open:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of a stretcher on which the ribs are joined, where the joining consists of two hinges at the two ends of two poles.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	However, this hinge must be more delicate than the stretcher and should be made either of iron or wood.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the width of each pole should be two fingers, and the edge of each should be one finger wide, and the length of each is one and a half palms; and in the middle of the two poles there are two joints made from the same material, which are already fixed, each of which has a length of half a palm plus a little more, and the width of each is two fingers or slightly more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additives should be inserted into the mother's mouth so that it is opened with them when you rotate the two prescribed instruments.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	And however at the extremity of his two additions thus as sometimes happens, and the length of those additions is each one palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to open the womb with those methods, then you make the woman lie down on the bed with her feet hanging off, and open what is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then open your hand with the instrument just as you would with scissors, cutting according to the amount you desire of the opening of the mouth of the wound until the midwife does what she wants. 
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of dizziness that the ancients called:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Forma of pushing with which the fetus is pushed:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Forma de amisidat am le qual es conterit le cap gran.
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it resembles forceps which have teeth at the end, just like tweezers, and sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, just like tweezers, which have teeth like saw teeth with which it is incised and contorted. 
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Forma de amesidat pauc:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Forma de unci havent una spina:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Form of an ounce having two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Forma de dos espatums latz:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All those instruments are exercised, and when more of their kinds are multiplied and prepared by the artisans, it is lighter for their operation and better for humans due to their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And you should not use those instruments at all, for the necessity of them is not excusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	From the extraction of the second molar.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second stage of labor is delayed in childbirth, then you must command the patient to hold their breath, and then make them sneeze with spices, and press your hand over their mouth and nose, and if by this the expulsion occurs, it is good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then you take an egg and pierce the shell with a hole and place it on herbs that have been burned, such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, Arabian safflower, and cinnamon stick, and mugwort.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water in the pot, and place that over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then place a reed tube in the mother's mouth, and keep it there so that the vapor comes to the cavity of the mother.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then make that person sneeze as we have said, and the second one will be expelled with velocity.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	And if this treatment is to continue and has not been completed, then you command the midwife to submerge her left hand in olive oil or in marjoram lotion, and then insert that into the vagina and search with that for the second twin, and once you have found it, slowly pull it out little by little. And if it is attached to the placenta of the firstborn, then insert your hand as we have described, and when you find the second twin, gently extract it bit by bit so that the mother does not suffer a violent traction.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Before anything is done, make sure that the right and left sides are manipulated easily.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And then adjust the amount of traction, for it will obey and withdraw from adherence.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the birth canal of the mother is narrowed, we have already described the treatment with sneezing and with medication using herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	But if it does not come out using all the methods we have recommended, then be careful not to strain too much in repeated attempts at extraction. However, what has emerged from him towards the birth canal should lie on the woman's thigh, and then anoint it with unguent and a four-part medicine; for this will cause it to ripen within a few days and become dissolved and expelled.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	When the patient is weak, raise their head and stomach to an elevated position, which alleviates the illness; then it becomes necessary to administer fumigations and appropriate treatments for this condition.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	However, some of the Ancients have expressed that fumigation with juniper and dried figs is effective.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	The method of the instrument used to fumigate a woman for the retention of menses and the secundines is as follows:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It should be made of brass or bronze.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And place the finer end into the vagina and the wider end over the fire, so that the fumigation is directed over the embers of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And keep it in place until that fumigation is finished and then repeat with another one.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	On the treatment of an infant's unperforated anus.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Some infants are born with their anus unperforated, which is a fine and obstructed closure.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then it is necessary for the midwife to pierce that swelling with her finger; and if not, pierce it with a sharp spatula, and be careful not to touch the membrane.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	Then place over it wool soaked in wine and oil; then treat it with an ointment until it is healed.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	But if you fear it is blocked, then place a catheter in the tract for several days, and remove it when the child wants to digest properly.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And it may happen that the anus is blocked by the consolidation of a plague or an abscess; then it is necessary to incise that consolidation and then treat it with what we have said about the treatment and the use of lead.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	On the treatment of fistulas that occur below.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that occur in the lower part below are narrow and thick, most of which appear near the anus externally or in the space of that part.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is a fistula or multiple fistulas.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that swelling is old and comes from moist white phlegm or subtle corruption, and sometimes these fistulas are penetrating.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those penetrating are known by what is excreted from them through excretion and flatulence; and sometimes the patient experiences excretion, and worms are expelled from them.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And of those fistulas some observed in the space penetrate into the bladder, and into the shaft of the penis; and of those that penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the buttocks.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And in what is known as a penetrating and non-penetrating fistula, it is that you insert your index finger into the anus, and introduce a thin probe of reed or iron into the fistula when there is no tortuosity.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	And if there is tortuosity in that area, then introduce a thin probe of lead or horsehair until you feel the probe or the hair with your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel anything at all and do not find any cause of discharge, worms, or gas during the procedure, as we have said, then you know that it is non-penetrating, and thus you should attend to its treatment.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the urethra of the penis, then its significance is that urine flows from it and prevents the area from being healed with medicine.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	But if it penetrates into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the area, then the sign of this is that the probe goes through there without tortuosity into the bone, causing pain in the affected area; and that pus continuously flows from it; and that medicine does not work on it, nor can it be healed with ointment.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those fistulas not everything is a complete cure, and the treatment of these relies on the hard work and vanity of the young doctors upon whom they depend.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	And in that which is not penetrating and not ancient, healing with iron is hoped for according to what I will recount to you, and this which has already been stated. 
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the patient lies between your hands on their back and raises their legs upwards, with the thighs inclined towards their abdomen, and then insert a lead probe, or an iron one if it is in a tortuous fistula, to where you know the probe reaches.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if the patient feels pain around the neck, then you must insert your index finger into the neck. 
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel in your hand the attempt already by itself to penetrate uncovered, or what you feel between your hand and that skin or flesh, then you know certainly that it is penetrating; and then do not work on that, for it is not a healing there, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	However, some say it is healthy in some men later.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And for the treatment by which improvement is hoped in him, you make a fine cautery according to the size of the fistula, as previously mentioned, and insert that ignited cautery into the fistula until it reaches around the neck; then repeat this two or three times until you know that all those fistulized tissues resembling feather quills have adhered together.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	Then treat it with warm poultices wrapped in cloth until all the adhered tissues come out, and then treat it with medicines that generate and consolidate flesh. If it is healed, that is good; if not, it will never be cured by any other treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if you insert a probe inside, and it does not penetrate into your finger which is in the anus, and between that finger and the probe, there is a layer of flesh or membrane, and twist the fistula so that it aligns with the surface of the cord. Then dry the cord from the beginning of the fistula, and you will see it drying with the probe, and place the probe inside until the drying reaches the point where the tip of the probe comes out, and through the probe, it is released and cut.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then clean those fistulated flesh which resembles a bird feather quill tube and do not break any of them for any reason.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	And if a flow of blood should come between you and your operation when you are cutting those flesh areas, then the best thing to do is use the lightest instrument for cauterization with fire or sharp medicine, because cautery with fire brings about two good effects: it ensures the adhesion of those pieces of flesh that have been brought together, and it stops the bleeding through the drying of the moistures.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then treat that area with cloths wrapped in fat or in finely ground herbs placed within the affected spot on the arm, and then treat the wound with ointments made from hardening and strengthening flesh. 
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And with medicines that have astringent and drying properties; when these are restored, the ailment is healed and there's no fear of recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	And if the fistula has already penetrated into the rectal area and extends from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and investigate with it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And thus if you feel resistance and between you and it there is a membrane of tissue or flesh, and it impedes penetration, then it is not an operation on it except by way of trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The treatment can be administered in one of three ways: either cauterize it as we have said; or dry out that area until you achieve the cavity so that you can insert instruments and proceed with the cure; do not cut excessively to avoid piercing the duct containing pus, and apply without causing harm to the patient’s will; then treat it with what we have mentioned for a full recovery; or extend that membrane and clean the pus by drying out the area near the anus as previously stated, using your hand or another sharp instrument, and then cleanse those fistula-infected tissues within the cut area through percussion; finally, strive to restore the entire wound by cutting, and if the opening above is not consolidated and the fistula remains open in part of the anus, the pus will flow lightly from the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the fistula is treated in this manner: it is when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it is on the side of the buttocks around the surface of the body with the chain and at the edge of the buttocks, then take a probe with a perforated tip, which is thus like a needle used for preparing the cores in this way:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	And insert into that area wrapped with five leaves or around it; then insert and try with the leaf into the fistula until you reach its cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	Here is the translation line by line:
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then treat the wound while it is still consolidating and healing.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the openings of the fistula are not penetrating, then make them penetrate in whatever way you prepare, but not so deep as to reach the vein, for it is not for you to do this so as not to injure the tendon; and then treat it until it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The method of using a spiked spatula with which the fistula is cut open: the curvature of which should be sharply pointed and the other part blunt, so as not to injure what is not necessary, just as is often done.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	On sewing hemorrhoids in which blood flows at the incision of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids are treated in two ways, for they either resemble charcoal-like lumps near the anus, or they may appear fatty like pieces of grease.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And of those, some are small and some are large, and blood flows continuously from them; they are numerous, and they appear outside the anus, and at its extremities.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	And yet those that are affected by the buttocks according to months of little moisture, from which yellow water or a little blood with continuous pus flows, and according to the color of the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the treatment for what is inside the anus is that you command the patient to sit and to strain so that the anus opens and the hemorrhoids appear before you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you take care and suspend them with hooks or hold them with your fingernail, and then cut those veins at their roots.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	If the wounds are not held together by their moisture and softness, then take them with a rough cloth or with charcoal or a beating of wool, and extract them with your fingers, and then incise them and sprinkle over them certain powdered substances near the incision, so that they may serve as a substitute for cautery; or cauterize them according to what is described in the chapter on cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then treat them with other treatments until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the stool does not come out easily, then use an enema on the patient with a nozzle that has a small bite, and wash it with the water in which chicory has been soaked, so that it facilitates a gentle evacuation when the patient is squeezed. 
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	And if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then their cause is light, and you should take them with your fingernail, or take them with a hook, and incise them, and then treat them with what we have said until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And for the incision that you will perform, you must suture them in this manner: take thread wrapped and insert it into a needle and then pull the hemorrhoids to the points above, and make that penetrate with the needle into the base of the other side, and wrap both ends of the thread at the point farthest from the needle, and do so latitudinally; tighten the hemorrhoid with strong pressure, and then tie off the thread and remove the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this to all of them, but leave one of them open and do not sew it up, so that the excess blood can flow out from that one.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And then place over the anus a cloth soaked in rose oil or ointment; put that over it and instruct the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then place that inside the cavity; and when it is heated, treat those areas with ointments or other treatments until they are healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	On the treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	White spots occur due to drying of the skin or natural constriction.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And when they are old and no longer respond to that medicine, then you must scrape those areas with the tip of a spatula or your nail until they become moist and remove the scabbed pus on top, which prevents them from healing; then treat those areas until they have healed.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then you must remove those areas with more vigorous scraping than the first until blood comes out and they are raw; then treat those areas until they are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	On the treatment of hemorrhoids, this is crucial.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that alamermar, which is crucial, appears as round spots similar to the color of a clove, and it occurs all over the body but mostly on the feet and hands, and often causes pain.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then it is necessary to incise what is around the nail, and hold it with scissors or tweezers, and remove it from its root; then treat that area.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you want, cauterize the wound that is described in the preceding chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	And a wart is a small, rough, tubular, round prominence on the surface of the body, and they often appear on the hands of children. 
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And the cure for it is that you extend and incise that area, or that you bind it with a bandage or with cloth inside which something falls (likely meaning to provide support or cushioning).
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize it, as we have said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And already the growths, both benign and malignant, have been removed with the instrument that I describe.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	And a "formica" is a small, furry or fistular swelling on the surface of the body that moves slightly under the skin, and when cold reaches it, it causes a sensation similar to an ant bite, and it appears around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And the cure for it is that you take a quill from an owl or a vulture, and let it be strong, and place that over the ant-like swelling so that it fits within the circle of the quill; then rotate your hand with the quill until you cut out what is within the circumference of the ant-like swelling, and insert it into the flesh's skin, so that you root out the ant-like growth from its base.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, do this with a reed or iron tube according to this method:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	The part above the tube should taper to a fine point, closed (that is, not perforated), and wrapped in such a way that when placed on the finger, its grip is secure and it can be rotated easily.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you want to cauterize the ant as was mentioned earlier in the section on cautery of the armpit in the chapter on cauteries.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	Of the shape of the instruments that are used to give christeri.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of large and small blisters:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the cannula above, which is tied to the bag, should be wide according to this manner; and it should be at such a distance where the bag is tied just so. 
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the extremity of the pus that has entered into the anus is closed (that is not open) to the lion; withdrawing due to subtlety; and on one side there are two tracks, and on the other side one track, and the width of the track should be according to the thickness of the rays, making it slightly thicker. 
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And let the bag in which animal bladder or sheepskin medicines are placed be one palm in size.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be pierced with thick threads in such a way as it is twisted; and the space between the threads should be as thick as a finger.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then introduce into those passages strong honey of raw honey which is made from ten hives, or around those; and adjust with that the bag; and when the bag is placed on him, it should be tight at the head of the catheter between two distinct points with strong compression, and then catheterize each passage: However, the quality of catheterizing with that is that you fill the bag with the medicine, which should be warmed according to the quantity tolerated by the patient; and beware lest it be too hot or too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And then the patient should be placed supine on their back, and raise their legs up and place them on a pillow or a cushion on which there are cloths or a sheet; and then anoint the tip of the catheter with oil or egg white or fenugreek mucilage or something similar; and then insert that into the rectum easily, and then the minister should take the bag and squeeze it with both hands and sometimes with force until everything in the catheter is evacuated into the intestine; and then remove the catheter and the patient raises their legs to the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine causes an expulsion, let it be as much as possible; and if one sleeps with that for an entire night, it is more beneficial for healing.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	And if you treat that person for intestinal disorders and the painful discharge from them, then you should repeatedly apply the cautery until it is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if there are hemorrhoids or abscesses in the anus, then use a gentle and lion's chrism (ointment), of the kind with which children are anointed.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Of the treatment of the plagues.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, it says that plagues are diversified according to how the plagues are caused and according to the place where the plagues fall.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes for which many times plagues are caused are thus: the throwing of stones, or cutting with a sword or knife, or striking with a lance, or with clubs, or with arrows, or similar to those many causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I am recommending the treatment of some diseases for which you should apply that reasoning and rule to other ailments.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will begin with the simple headaches, for the memory of the compound ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Thus, when you encounter a simple headache in the head and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it is due to a stone or similar cause, and it has already constricted the vein so much that it is a severe headache and you fear an abscess may develop, then you should be cautious and perform venesection of the cephalic vein immediately, and do not delay this; extract blood according to the amount of strength of the patient unless there is any prohibiting cause for venesection, especially if the blood that comes out due to the headache is minimal.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And let the venesection be performed on the opposite side of the affected area; and protect the patient from cold and from heavy foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if any contraindication prohibits [venesection], then reduce the food intake and avoid meat and wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And place on the affected area, if an abscess has developed, some wool soaked in olive oil or in wine that has been stypticized.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed that condition, then apply ointments in between until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	And if the wound is large or caused by a sharp and similar instrument, and the edges of it cannot be brought together with pillows, then bring those edges together with sutures as I will describe regarding the suturing of them.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	But if the wound has already exposed the bone and sinew, and there is no retention of it but only a small suspensorium, then incise that area and subsequently treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh by suturing in place. Command the patient to abstain from food that is greasy: meats and forms like them until it is composed (healed).
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find putrefaction in the wound that does not adhere to the bone, then you should incise all of that rotten part and remove it, and subsequently treat it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	But if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which bleeding can occur and it cannot be stopped by medicines, then you should probe the artery. If you find that it has not been cut, then incise it with a spatula or ligate it. And if necessity forces you such that what we have said does not work, then cauterize until the blood is stopped.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these sores are simple and small, then their cause is light; therefore, you powder over those this powder, which solidifies before the air changes them.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the method of the powder is this: take oil of asses one part, dragon's blood two parts, fresh cow-dung three parts; let it all be finely ground and sieved, and with it fill the wound, and apply a good compression until it adheres well to that area, and let it clot with the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And then bind that area above with pillows and leave it like that, and do not loosen it while it is thus, until the inflammation subsides, because the medicine within has not been fully absorbed until it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes this alone is sufficient as treatment, when you do not have access to ashes and dragon's blood. 
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this operation is performed in large wounds when it is necessary to place them tightly and thus treat fresh wounds with their blood, which has not been altered by the air.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, especially when it is in summer time, then it is not intended for the position of this powder, but rather treat those with what we have said, such that you place upon those areas poultices mixed with these things, or that you place upon those places flour of bran with water and honey to prevent putrefaction; and then treat those with the other cure until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	But if the wound causes a fracture in the bone, and it is small, then you extract it with care.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I will speak of the treatment for fractures of the skull in cases where there is danger of poisoning.
De las plaguas del col.	Of the wounds of the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	But if the wound occurs in the neck, then there is no difference in treatment, compared to a simple wound on the head.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	But if the nerves or arteries of the neck are cut, then if it is a nerve, there should be no treatment other than avoiding any action that causes strong astringency, such as using substances like zinc sulfate and vitriol, which bind and constrict those nerves.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not place anything cold on the wound at all, for the substance of the nerves is sensitive to cold and their continuation reaches the brain, which is the most important part of all the members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it is necessary to treat with mild medications, such as washing with warm water, sometimes infused in olive oil whether rubbed or not rubbed, and thyme when washed with warm water and the other small stones according to this method, and then apply moist ointment.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	And if the wound is large, then administer sutures, or close its edges, and then treat it with poultices until it heals.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	If there is depth to the wound or you encounter putrefaction in its lower part, then pierce it at the deepest point.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	But if in the wound an artery is already cut and bleeding occurs, then separate or dry it out, tie it off, or cauterize it if the situation necessitates such action.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the vertebrae of the neck have already been cut through entirely and the veins of the neck are saved, then you should bring together the edges of the wound with sutures over the bone of the neck without touching it; first equalize it and reduce it to its natural form, then strengthen it with appropriate binding, and leave it for several days; afterwards treat it with ointments that have astringent and stimulating properties until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	But if the wound has caused protrusion in the bone, then pound it down, and if there are fragments of bone within it, extract all that you can; leave what cannot be removed until the wound putrefies, and let it separate so that the protrusion is reduced.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the wound is recent, then sprinkle over it the powder that has been recommended to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	And if an ulcer forms in the wound, then treat it with that which the remedy will be discussed later in its respective chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Regarding wounds to the neck or similar, when inflicted between the shoulders, whether caused by a spear, sword, lance, or similar weapons.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a puncture from a lance or sword, and you measure the depth of the wound, then consider whether gas escapes from the wound when the patient breathes; if so, know that the wound is mortal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is no deep penetration and the wound is recent with its own blood, then you should apply powder to it within the first hour, but do not keep it covered so that the blood is not retained in the depth of the wound and returns to the heart, harming the patient; instead, apply an attractive unguent to it, and change that twice a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the unguent is not available to you, then apply a piece of cloth to the wound's opening so that it draws out the moisture; and have the patient lie in such a way that the wound is positioned to allow whatever is inside to drain out.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	And if three days or more have passed since the onset of the plague and you do not observe spasms, heart palpitations, or constriction of the lungs in the patient, and other good signs appear, then know that the plague is survivable; and then treat it with poultices and with other treatments until it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	And if the healing of it is unnecessary, and it has been open for a long time, then know that a fistula has formed; therefore, treat it according to its chapter [meaning, treat it using the methods described for such a condition].
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the wound is caused by a cut from a sword or knife and is simple on the surface of the foot or back, then treat it with stitching if it is large, or with powder if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	And if the bone has already become infected and parts of it are affected, then you should turn the wound and use forceps to extract those pieces, if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	And if they are not separated, then leave them inside until the wound becomes pus-filled, which will make their extraction easier.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other accidental plagues in other members, the aid in cure is the aid of what we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the ailments of the belly.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The discomfort that occurs in the belly is either severe, slight, or moderate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	In severe cases, you will see the intestine or nerves of the intestine, because their insertion and the suture of them are more forceful and more delicate.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And a small disruption is made difficult by another method, and it is known that their reduction is more difficult if you do not pay attention to their insertion into their proper place immediately, because they swell and become thicker, making the intervention difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore the best disruption is moderate, because in that case, the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, just as it is difficult in the two previously mentioned types.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And know that the suturing of the belly is done in four ways, but two methods are common and similar to the suturing of other ailments of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other specific methods of suturing are similar to those used for other ailments, but they are more specifically applied in the suturing of the belly.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I recommend to you each with explanation and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	So it is said that when the hernia is small and some part of the intestine has protruded through it, and it becomes difficult to reduce it back, then it is one of two ways: either due to the smallness of the opening as we have said, or when the intestine swells due to the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And so when it is thus, then you must warm that area by submerging a sponge or cloth soaked in warm water alone, or boiled in vinegar, and cyperus, and cloves, and apply that to the intestine until the swelling is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And sometimes it is done in the way that has astringency, and it is better than plain water alone for reducing the swelling.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And so when you see the swelling resolved, then moisten the intestine with water in which yarrow and mallows have been boiled, for this alleviates the internal part of it without much harm.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	If surgical intervention is necessary for this treatment, then incise the disruption slightly with an instrument used to cut hemorrhoids.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first treatment is better when it is appropriate that there be no drying out, and there should not be an effort to dry near necessity and deficiency.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	From the instrument, if it is of such form:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of the sharp wound, and the other part not-sharp, and the extremity subtle, and not be as subtle as a spatum, before it is slightly blunt.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And so when the swelling has increased and you have removed the intestine, now it is necessary that its reduction be according to its natural form, in its proper place, if possible over this, for it is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	And when the disruption is wide and is in the lower part of the abdomen, then it is necessary that you make the patient lie on their back, and raise their thighs higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then you raise the head and feet higher than the other parts.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then always keep your attention and consideration focused on this so that the part where the swelling is becomes higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus you must administer this in large swellings and in medium-sized swellings.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in small swellings, apply what you have prepared, then have the minister place it between your compassionate hands, who will hold the disruption entirely with their hand and adjust its edges, then suture it from one side to the other as closely as possible. 
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of suturing: first you take the needle, or a bundle of needles according to the quantity of the wound's width; and then leave at the end of the disruption of the ring finger, and tighten the needle once, ensuring that you do not place thread at both ends of the chain; with both ends of the clip which is left on the chain from inside, until you make it penetrate through that part; and you have already added both ends of the chain and both ends of the clip, and so four layers are made.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And then strengthen with double thread around the circumference of the needle, and sometimes on both sides together, and then bring together the two edges and the wound by a neat approximation; and then leave the thickness of a finger and insert another needle there, and then tie that with thread as you did with the first needle; and do not stop doing this if it is necessary to use needles until you have completed the entire closure of the wound.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And let the needles be of moderate thickness between coarseness and fineness, for fine needles lightly penetrate the flesh; and thick ones are difficult to insert into the wound, and therefore it is necessary that they be of moderate fineness and thickness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And it is not necessary to insert the needle at both ends of the wound immediately, so that the flesh is not lightly cut and the wound can close before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And let the stitches not be too long so that the wound is not prevented from consolidating.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then sharpen the ends of the needles so that they do not disturb the patient during their sleep; and place over the stitches small pieces of cloth from all sides, which cover the ends of the needles; and leave them until you know that the wound is already consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And these types of stitching with needles in this manner are more suitable for small wounds, where only one or two needles suffice for the stitching or around them.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the second suture is communal: it is that you administer with a suture the four extremities, of the chain and two extremities of the spine, at once, with a needle on which the thread should be wrapped equally in fineness and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And then when you have penetrated these four extremities with the needle, withdraw the needle from that same part where you began, so that the thread pulls out any pus from the underlying part to the wound, so that the suture is like a fabric suture with which fabrics are sewn together.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And pause between each suture the width of a little finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this suture is known to men. 
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And with such a suture, I sewed the wound which was inflicted on a man in his belly which had been wounded by a knife, and it was a disruption of the wound measuring more than one palm, and there were intestines hanging out around two palms from the center location and the rupture was in the middle of the member; and then I returned the intestine after it had protruded for 24 hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound was healed within about fifteen days, and I treated it, and it healed; and then he lived for many years, and his condition improved.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And the other doctors had judged that it could not be healed; and yet it was healed by a miracle, for I did not treat it with ointment, for there was no place where ointment or any medicine could be found, but instead placed on the wound an old cloth twice a day and washed it frequently with honey water until it healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	But I want to describe two types of suture specific to the narration of Paraula.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And you begin with a chain suture, and insert the needle from the outer part to the inner part.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And so when the needle pierces into the spine and in those specific places according to the straightness and length of the whole body, and leaves the extremity of the chipac into which you have inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate from inside out at the other end on the opposite side of the wound. 
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And when you have made that penetration, then penetrate again in the same extremity of the cloth from the outside part to the inside part; and leave the extremity of the needle that is on this side, and pierce the needle into the other extremity from the inner part to the outer part.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And use that to penetrate with your penetration with which you make that penetrate into the anus at the end of the instrument which is in the part inside so that all of it penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then begin from this side of the wound and sew that up to the extremity which is on the opposite side, and remove the needle from the thread which has penetrated, and then return it into that thread and stitch the extremity of the wound which is on the other side with this external part of the mirror; and remove it from the thread which belongs to him.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this once and another time, and do this once then again in between as you sew everything that is on the outside according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this method of suturing is that you sew with a skin suture with which I sew skins, in such a way that you sew the flap once from the end of the chain, and that you leave that other side until you have completed it.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	Here is the translation of the provided medieval medical text line by line into English:
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	You should place the needle at the end of the thread near you from the outside part, and make that penetrate to the inside part in the same spot, and leave both ends of the suture; then turn the needle and make it penetrate from the outside to the inside through both ends of the suture.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	Then rotate those sutures, and make each one penetrate from the inside part to the outside part through both ends of the thread on the opposite side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this method of suturing is better than the common superficial suturing, and it is a type of suturing that promotes healing.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the sermon of Gaul.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And more specifically, for repairing the abdominal sutures, two needles are used, each with a thread. Begin by inserting one needle from your side and make it penetrate to the other side following the suturing method where the threads equally secure the wound.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And know that when the disruption is in the middle of the abdomen, then suturing it is more difficult than suturing other areas of the abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	But the treatment of plague medicine is judgment of other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The sentence provided is a mix of medieval medical terminology and a Romance language structure similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Here's an attempted translation based on the given context:
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the wound, then place on that area unguents which you have at hand before they turn into hard stone and discharge bile, and consolidate them with care and attention; then treat it in the same way as other wounds until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	And if you do not have the medicines at hand, then place something on that area immediately, as it starts to discharge pus and become inflamed. Change this treatment twice a day, as you are taught, until it is healed, for you would not need any other medication in most cases when the wounds are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	But if you fear that the wound may spread to the major limbs, then you must soak lion's wool in high-quality tempered oil or in anointed oil, and place it around the areas between the joints and leave them there.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if there is pain or putrefaction in the intestines, for it often occurs this way, then treat it with black theban styptic vinegar, especially if the corruption has reached the intestine and has penetrated into its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that the one that is of the large intestine has a lighter healing than the one that is in the small intestines. 
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is difficult to heal when the intestine called "inguinal" does not receive relief from all sides of the plague that falls upon it; and this is due to the great number of veins within it, as well as its significant size in those veins, and by the subtlety of its structure, and because of its closeness to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	And if what you process from the plague is the membrane, and you obtain it fresh, reduce it according to your prescription with which you treat intestines similarly.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	But if it has passed into the space and is already turned green or black, then when you stretch that with a needle over the area that is discolored, to cause bleeding, because in the membrane there are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then cut what is another ligament, and place the two ends of the needle hanging from the part removed from the plague outside it, so that you may alleviate the traction of it by lifting the membrane and releasing the arm of the plague.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembering the plagues when they occur in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When there is a rupture in the intestine and it is small, then it can be restored in some people; for this reason I saw one who was injured in his abdomen by a lance thrust, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old and had become fistula, and thus gas and air passed from him.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then I considered the treatment of him already knowing that he was not stuck in his recovery, but stopped delving into what healed and where the area is consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And I put that you see the area already stabilized, worry about the patient lest they suffer an accident of evil in their belly; and not to suffer any misfortune from this bad accident, they should follow carefully all their dietary arrangements eating and drinking, then take a bath and exercise as directed.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And already some experienced ones have said that when there is a small ulcer on the intestine, then it must be tied in this manner: you take ants with large heads; and then you adjust the two lips of the ulcer and place an ant from those which have their mouth open over the two lips of the ulcer; thus when it bites onto them and tightens its mouth, cut off the head of the ant, because it adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And then place another ant next to the first one, and do not cease to do this with ants placed next to each other according to the quantity of the entire ulcer.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And then close the ulcer and sew it up; let those heads remain attached inside the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not cause any harm to the patient.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestine be tied with fine thread made from the intestines of animals attached to it, as it is finer than regular thread; you take the end of this intestinal thread, which should be stripped of its membrane, and then tie the end of it with thread wrapped around it, and then insert that thread into needles and sew the intestine with it, and return it to the disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this method of缝合使用蚂蚁not only是一种信任和希望的次要方式。
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	And if the wound is large and extensive, especially if it is in one of the delicate intestines, then it cannot be healed with mere subtlety, and it is not a complete cure.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Of the treatment for hemorrhoids and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that any plague or abscess when it becomes corrupted and grows old, and turns into an ulcer, and if it is not consolidated and continuously discharges pus without being separated, then, in whichever part of the body it may be, it is universally called a fistula, and we call that condition azukem.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And a fistula, according to the truth, is a furrowed, hard, white swelling in which there is no pain and which has a cavity like that of a bird's feather quill; therefore, we call that kind of swelling rizatz, which means quill.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And in some people, there is moisture that discharges pus; and quickly, this moisture is severed within a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And at times this moisture is thick, and it is scanty, and it is coarse, and it is fine.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already said before in the division when I discussed the plagues that any ulcer which does not heal or is not on bare flesh, it happens due to one of these causes: one of which is either due to a lack of blood in the body; or due to the malice of the ulcer itself; or because there is hard flesh between the ulcer and the lips preventing new flesh from growing; or because it is thick pus; or because that ulcer inside is rotten and the material within it is of poor quality; or because the medicine used is inappropriate for its treatment; or when corruption sets in the region, causing pestilence; or due to the nature of the region as in Saragossa, where diseases are difficult to digest, and the natural healing of abscesses is delayed there; or because there is a bone or several bones within it.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	And all those causes have been shown, and the signs of those and their cure through medicines in this section.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And it is necessary that I make you understand the treatment of fistula, which is done through surgical means with my hand.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And know that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body; for among these are those that affect the large veins and arteries, or the nerves, or the spine, or the intestines, or the bladder, or some of the ribs, or some of the vertebrae of the back, or any of the compound joints such as those of the hand and foot; and these are the ones that extend to the proximity of the main limb and similar areas.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And therefore, among these fistulas that follow this manner, they are among the illnesses difficult to heal, and do not receive proper treatment, and the handling of them is laborious and ignorant.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if among these fistulas there is one whose depth does not reach the locations mentioned, and you hope for and trust in its treatment, and wish to understand it better, then take a thread of wool or iron, and if the fistula runs straight, probe it with that.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	But if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a thin lead wire, for lead, because of the lightness of its body, is flexible and can follow the twists.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula has horrible swellings, it is not possible for you to determine its nature by feeling.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then cleanse the openings through their own passages, for the moisture with which you cleanse that area should come out of the other openings and flow from them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	Then inquire carefully, according to the method by which you can know if there are bones or nerves here, whether the cavity of the fistula is deep or shallow, or whether it is a fistula with multiple openings and lies throughout all this with the full strength of your examination, with which you examine the patient, and the discovery of the pain should be compressed with your hand over the area, and similar to the symptoms and accidental causes of the abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have stood over all those causes with true understanding, then proceed to the treatment according to confidence: and it is that you now consider whether it is an apparent fistula near or in a salty place, far from a joint, or from a nerve, or from an artery, or from a vein, or from one of the places which you know and mention.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Now you dry the fistula according to what was said before about its opening, and remove what is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and what has grown in the openings of the flesh, or of bone and similar, and care for that inside so that it may be healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	And if the fistula is of deep length and runs straight, then you must incise it as much as possible, and then clean all its corrupted flesh; and then apply poultices wrapped in sharp medicines, and insert them into the cavity of the fistula which you have grasped with an instrument.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do this several times until the sharp medicine corrodes all that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula from the corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore it with ointments that will generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	And if it is not healed by this method, then you must cauterize it as we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the cause of the fistula is bone and you must be certain of this, then you should investigate it and dry it out as we have recommended, provided that you do not interfere with any vein or nerve or major limb as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	And if the bone is exposed and there is some corruption and blackening in it, then you must scrape it until all the corruption is removed; and then treat it with something that will cause it to heal until it is cured.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if the arm is not healed and thrown away just as it was before, then you know that you have not fully reached the eradication of the corruption; and then you uncover it again and thoroughly examine it and cleanse it with your final strength, and then restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And if it is healed, that is good; and if not, then you know that the corruption is in the distant depths of the body, which has not been reached, and then there can be nothing done but to leave that alone.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is possible for you to remove it, then you should extract it with delicate forceps that are suitable for this purpose.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there are multiple bones affected, then thoroughly perform the extraction of all of them, and do not leave any behind for any reason with your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if any impediment arises from the humors, and at its beginning there is neither fear nor error, then incise those ligaments or flesh if they are present, and free the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	And if you are not prepared to set the bones of your patient, then apply something that can reduce the inflammation over the wound, and leave it there until what is around those bones of flesh and ligaments is softened, and guard the wound so that it does not become hardened, and constrain the section which you have incised in your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	If you fear so, apply a cloth soaked in crushed and oiled herbs, or a cloth soaked in Egyptian ointment, or any of the green ointments, for when those ligaments soften and the bones are separated from their extraction, that tension is relieved.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	But if it is a large bone such as the thigh bone or the hip bone or similar ones, and only the surface of it is corrupted, then scrape that area gently only behind where the blackness and corruption are removed, and then restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	But if the corrupted part is large, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that area and completely incise in the location where the corruption has spread, and then treat it until it is consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend to you that which happens to a man in his thigh so that you may use this as an example and aid for your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then extend the time with that by mistake of doctors until the abscess is opened, and pus will come out from it, and its healing will be slowly completed until the chest becomes fistulized, and many holes are made in it which all discharge pus and the body's moisture.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then many doctors attended to the patient for about two years, but none of them knew much about the art until I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And see the chest of him and the materials that were flowing from those orifices in large amounts; and already the body of that man was entirely swollen, and its color was yellowish.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I insert the probe into one of those orifices and bring the probe to the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	Then I carefully examined all the orifices and found those that lead to the chest from all sides.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I prepared and made an incision on one of those orifices where I discovered a part of the bone, which was corrupted; it had already become brittle, corrupted, and darkened; and a part of the chest that had been penetrated was already corrupted, extending into the marrow.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I treated what was discovered and prepared of the exposed bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I ensured that only the corruption in the bone was what I cut out and treated, which I had already identified.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	Then I applied the restoration of the wound with consolidating medicine for a long time, and it was not consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	Then I repeated the procedure and re-examined the bone beyond the initial exposure, and found continued corruption with the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And search for what appears to me from that corruption, and then I was pierced doing the cure of it and restoration, and it is not restored. 
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I uncover the other side and do not stop dissecting the bone little by little, carefully performing its restoration, and it is not restored until I cut around about a palm's width of it, and that part is extracted with its marrow, and then restore it with medicines, and it is slightly consolidated and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And iteration in the operation and section of it is not necessary unless due to the disposition of its frailty and the lack of tolerance and fear of death, for accidents happen at all times because of the excess of evacuation causing fainting spells.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And thus, it is completely healed by thorough healing, and where there was bone, now there is hard flesh; its condition is well established in its body, and its strength returns; its conditions are improved, and it does not suffer any contradiction while moving nor harm in any way.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	However, if there is a protruding bone in an already injured part of the body, then you must proceed as follows: take a ligament and tie it tightly at the end of the protruding bone, and command someone to hold it taut; use a thicker woolen bandage than the first one; then bind it over the flesh that is below the bone, and stretch the extremity so that you pull the flesh apart; and you uncover the flesh over the area where you wish to saw so that the saw does not touch the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And place a stick or board under the bone properly, for when you do this, it is not forbidden to use the saw without drying out the corrupted flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And it is necessary that the incision be made gradually over the corrupted area, because if corruption is in the cavity of the bone and does not appear on its visible surface, and may require another incision later.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, before it was one part connected to the other, and the corruption is at the middle or in a part of it, then you uncover the flesh from all sides completely; then place wood underneath it, and then bind that first part where the corruption is until the suturing of the other part continues.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And let the binding be according to the place of the corruption a little, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and bind the bone where it continues from the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not reasonable to proceed but to remove [the affected part].
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; however, you must examine how the corruption appears to you, and cut away that part, and cleanse it according to whichever method is possible for you, and in all cases, correction should be made by you, unless there is a vein or nerve that would oppose this.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And know what are the incisors and the saws to cut these bones vary according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of those, and the thickness of those, and the fineness and the size and the smallness of those, and the hardness and their rarity; therefore it is necessary that you prepare every kind of operation with an instrument suitable for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And know that this operation means for you to understand the type of instrument you would need; when you have great study and long experience and knowledge of the methods of this art, and are a witness to the methods of diseases, because now you can apply what is suitable from the instruments to every disease.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And I am forming for you at the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will use as simples with which you will proceed to your prohibition, which you will experiment on others. 
Forma de serra:	Forma de serra:
Forma de autra serra:	Forma de autra serra:
Forma de autra serra:	Forma de autra serra:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Forma de autra serra gran:
Forma de ray:	Forma de ray:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	Make the head of this vein in the shape of a star-shaped nail head, and the points on it should be according to the shape of the raised points. 
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it is not appropriate that only the ends of the joints be rubbed when they are corrupted, or if there is a large wide opening.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Forma de razori major dels others:
Forma de razori menor:	Forma de razori menor:
Forma de razori lat:	It seems that the provided text is in an archaic or constructed language that draws elements from Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Given this context, here's a translation of the given sentence:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.
Forma de lu:	The phrase "Forma de lu:" seems incomplete or could be part of a larger sentence. It might mean something like "Shape of it:" or "Form of it:". However, without additional context, it's challenging to provide an accurate and meaningful translation. Could you provide the complete sentence or more context?
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Form of the razor in which there is a concavity:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Form of razor or subtle method:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Form of another reason of curved extremity:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Form of instruments with which bones are cut:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Forma de inscisori autra minor:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Form of another incisor; this resembles a ray, and the end of it is like a saw, and it is applied in multiple places along the line of the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio dequel que es perforat dels osses:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And the end of it is triangular and with a sharp point.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly it is necessary that all the causes we have mentioned for razors and scissors and saws [are considered].
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of the incision of extremities and of the suturing of the bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities may become corrupt either due to intrinsic or extrinsic causes. If you have treated that corruption with medicines and the cure does not bring relief, or if the corruption progresses to the member without any perceivable cause, then you must incise that member in such a way that the corruption is cut off, so that the patient can be saved from death or further malevolence which is a greater deficiency of the limb.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of the one to whom this happens is that the member turns black before it falls off, as if fire had already burned it, or you may see approaching the blackness which spreads into that member affecting him and taking over the whole body; therefore be cautious and proceed with incision on that area.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly, if the cause of the corruption is due to some venomous causes, such as from a sea scorpion or viper or rattlesnake and the like.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or the affliction is in the extremity of the finger, then you must incise the finger and do not give space for the corruption to spread into the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly if you access the hand, then you incise it at the base of the finger, and do not give space for corruption to enter into the arm of the wrist.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if you need to do so, then incise the arm between the elbow and the joint. 
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if the corruption passes further and extends around the thigh, then in that case it is the death of the patient; and to administer another cause for this in treatment is an excess of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly treat the foot when corruption overtakes the toe of the foot, then you incise it between one of the joints.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if you take hold of the instep of the foot, then you incise the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	And if it enters into the knee, then you incise the thigh between the joint of the knee.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already spread over the knee, then there is no remedy but resignation, and leave the patient to death.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the method of incising or amputating the limb is that you tighten a ligature at the part just below where you wish to incise, and tighten another ligature above the area; and have an assistant extend a ligature to the parts below, and another assistant extend a ligature above it; and you separate the flesh between the two ligatures with a spatula so that all the flesh is exposed; then proceed to incise or amputate.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And it is necessary that cloth be placed from all sides so that the area does not come into contact with it, and that the patient receives a precise lesion and an abscess is prevented. 
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	And if you encounter blood flow while working, then you should cauterize the area appropriately, or apply some powder to stop the bleeding; and then return to your treatment until it is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then bind the affected limb with a suitable bandage, and care for it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I recommend to you what happened to a man in his foot, this accident which I and you recommend, which is that the man's foot turned black due to burning, similar to combustion from fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption began first in his toe and then spread to the entire foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepared himself for various pus to come out as part of the treatment due to the intensity of the pain and burning he experienced, and he cut off that foot up to the joint, and it was healed.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	For a long time, that same corruption occurred in the index finger of his hand.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then he came to me, and I performed the procedure to remove that excess using some of the medicines that I applied to his hand, followed by cleansing his body; but the excess did not subside and began to spread to another finger until it reached his entire hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And the urge led me to incise his hand, but I did not want to do so, hoping against the reaction of that excess, and more because I feared the incision of his hand once dead, for the strength of the patient was fading.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And since he departed from me, he returned to his land and it came to me that that man prepared and cut his hand entirely, and was healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have added this narrative only to be helpful regarding what can be done for this illness, and its meaning by which it should be understood and according to which it should be treated.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	About the treatment of the sinuses and the quality of enemas with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess occurs in fleshy limbs and the space of the abscess is prolonged to the point that it collects pus, and then it bursts and perforates, and the pus is discharged from it, leaving the area empty like a vessel, and the skin over it appears thin like fine cloth, and no severe corruption has occurred, and it does not affect the bone or nerves or ligaments, it is called a sinus, and it is not referred to as a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	However, if the space is prolonged to the point that corruption affects any limb, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the treatment of it is to incise that skin entirely as it has formed, especially when it has become thin like cloth, and ensure that it does not adhere to the area due to its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And when you consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the arm that you use should have a fragrant odor, then cleanse it with an Egyptian medicine which consists of olive oil, vinegar, and honey in equal parts, and they are mixed together in one vessel, and heated over fire until the medicine becomes warm and reaches the consistency of honey.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then you take what is necessary from it and dissolve it with water and honey; and administer it as an enema to the intestine, tighten the openings of it, and leave the medicine in there for a quantity of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then extract that with a scraper; and do this for so many days until the intestine is cleansed and the swelling is reduced.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And sometimes it is administered as an enema with ashes water when this medicine is not available to you; and that you take the ash of vines, and put it in the water; then mix that and use it to administer an enema until you are convinced that the intestine is now clean.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient does not tolerate Egyptian medicine or ashes water, then administer it as an enema with water and honey, and mix in ground zingiber (ginger), and also administer it as an enema with wine and honey mixed together, for the property of honey is to cleanse and wash, and the wine makes the intestine adhere more, especially when the wine has an excess of astringency and dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you do this several times and are satisfied that the sinus is already cleansed, then irrigate it with something that promotes flesh growth.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And it is that you take some unguent of diaphoretic and dissolve that with rose oil and styptic wine; or you can perform an enema with certain medicines and use other ointments that have the properties which I have already written about in the treatise on ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the sinus opening is narrow where the enema tube cannot be received, then you should gradually enlarge it with a small instrument, and place linen cloth wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it is enlarged.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And similarly, if the opening is wide, then you should sew the edges together and leave a quantity through which the enema can enter additionally.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the opening from which the fluid flows is raised towards the upper parts, then dry it at the lowest point of it so that the fluid can flow down. For when the fluid is constricted in the depth of the sinus, the flesh is generated within it.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinus around the lowest part of the bone as you wish, then you must prepare the limb with a treatment that allows the fluid to flow out easily according to what is suitable for you and ensure that there is no obstruction causing the fluid to be retained within it.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidating medicines that are placed over the sinus, appropriate for your purpose, and extend them over a linen cloth.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the cloth should be of such great quantity as to cover all of the sinus; then cut with scissors at the right place on the opening of the sinus somewhat wider than the opening itself; then spread another piece of linen over it according to the width of the cut, and place it above the distant part of the sinus opening so that the discharge from the arm can be alleviated, and do not change the large cloth but only occasionally for a few days once.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	And the one that is over the opening of the sinus should be changed frequently so that what comes out from the arm can be collected.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you may know whether what flows from the arm is much or little, or if it is digested or undigested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And with this, you should consider the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if there is an abscess in it.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And as your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see the material that was placed over the sinus opening has already adhered or is about to adhere, then change it every three days. When you remove the dressing, change the cloth to another one and renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	And if within the sinus close to that space there are subtle viruses, then do not despair about its adhesion, for its healing is approaching, for some people take a long time for flesh to regenerate in their wounds, and others experience the opposite effect.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if within the sinus for many days there is undigested matter, then you know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and becomes prolonged, then you adjust with drying medicines, and if the medicines are moist in their substance and virtue, they should be as dry as diafrenicon, which is adjusted to remove excess addition.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the most recent method used for treatment is to take diafrenicon ointment and dissolve it in rose oil, and apply it over the area continuously as an ointment in its substance, then warm that area with it, and use it accordingly.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And it appears in that action, when there is no undigested matter, to use diafrenicon ointment, honey which is boiled until it is thickened, and apply it; or take myrrh and aloe and resin, grind all of them together, powder them over the honey while it is on the fire, then spread this mixture on cloth and bind it over the sinus; or spread that with the honey which you have boiled until it is thickened, powder it over the cloth, and bind it.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And at times they are administered with long aristologia and roots of the celestial lily (and it is the celestial lily) and flour of iron and centaury, and use of those simples or compounds, crush those and sieve and powder over the honey which has been cooked; and use that.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the swelling is prolonged and does not heal with this treatment, then you know that the corruption is in the joint of it, and already investigate in the bones or in other hard members or in the ligaments; then cure it with fistula treatment, as was said above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	On the treatment of abscesses and inflamed nails, and the addition of finger incisions and amputations.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	An abscess is a swelling that occurs below the nail of the fingers or toes, and it can also appear on other fingers. As it prolongs and its treatment is neglected, it becomes a more severe infection or corruption, and it begins to rot at the root of the nail, eventually corrupting the entire area. Its corruption spreads inward to the bone, causing a foul odor, and it deforms the tip of the finger, turning its color dark.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And therefore when you have that condition which we have described in the division and do not agree with your treatment, then you must incise with iron all the superfluous part that remains of the nail and then cauterize the wound near it, for a hot cautery is helpful in this.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is safe and the nail is healthy, but the edges of the nail are already pressing into the flesh inside, and they begin to pierce and cause pain, then you must place a thin rod under the angle of the nail that is piercing the flesh, and push it up; then cut that part of the flesh with ease, and apply cauterizing corrosive medicines over what remains until it is all removed; and then treat it with ointments until it heals.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	But if the corruption has already penetrated into the bone, then you must cut into the bone and extract it, for it will never heal as long as the corrupted bone remains inside.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the corruption and decay spread to the finger, then you should cut it at one of the joints where its removal is necessary, and then treat it until it heals.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	But if the nail has suffered an impact or friction and there is severe pain, then at the beginning you should bleed the patient, and then dry the nail with a sharp spatula using a transverse section from top to bottom. Be careful that the cut does not go into the flesh under the nail, for you would cause the patient severe pain and may result in the excessive growth of skin around the area; then treat the area with something that relieves pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	But said adjustment, which is born in the hands of many men, it is very fleshy all over, and very solid in the bones, or very strong in the nails.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some of them are born in the region of the joint, or its birthplace is in certain nodes of those [joints].
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	But he who is born with this condition in some nodes does not suffer, and he who is born with strong joints in it is worse off.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those that are born fleshy, the incision is superficial, and it is such that you should cut through the root of it with a spatula.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	More difficult is the cure of that which is born at the root of the joint; and thus beware of amputating it.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	More consolidation which occurs between the bones, either through heredity of the person born thusly, or due to consolidation from disease or combustion by fire, or by similarity, then it is necessary to dry out that consolidation before the bones return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And then place between the layers of the infused oil-soaked cloth to prevent them from lightly adhering, and separate between those, or place between those a thin sheet of lead until they are properly consolidated.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly, if there is consolidation in some of the palms, then you dry out that consolidation according to how it is prepared and adapted to the shape of the limb.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	From the inception of vices, these are varicose veins.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Varicose veins are enlarged, twisted veins filled with excessive melancholic humors that appear in the limbs of the body, and they most commonly occur in the legs, especially in the legs of travelers, laborers, and those who carry heavy loads.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Then it is necessary that you administer a purge of black bile several times with strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	The treatment of these conditions with iron is in two ways: one is to incise and draw out the black blood, and the other way is to elevate the vein and extract it entirely.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The procedure is as follows: first, apply hot water to the leg at the beginning so that the thick blood, which is feculent in the leg, can be resolved. Then, tightly bind the patient's leg from the highest part of the thigh down to just below the knee with a bandage. Next, dry the vein in one place, or two, or three places with an incision, and then draw out the black blood with your hand from below the leg upwards and downwards until the desired quantity of blood is extracted, which the patient's strength can tolerate.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then apply water to it, and command him to abstain from foods that generate black bile. 
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And repeat the treatment by phlebotomy when the veins are full and inform the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	And the elevation of them is according to this method: you who shave the chest of the patient, if it has much hair, then put him in a bath and anoint his chest with warm water until it reddens and the veins are engorged; or exercise him vigorously, if a bath is not available, until the limb is warmed.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then dry the chain along the vein by making an incision in the leg or in the rear of the limb near the knee, or at the lowest part near the ankle.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then grasp the chain with forceps and milk the vein from all sides until it appears to the touch, and you should appreciate the appearance of what you are doing as the area turns slightly black.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And thus, when you remove the chain, you will see that white substance which is like a string.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then place it in such a way that it is elevated and separated from the chain, and suspend it with an ounce of lion's fat. 
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then make another incision near that incision by three fingers, and then stretch the skin of the area above the vein where it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then lift that part and cut it at the rear incision below the talus, and then extract that part and lift it until it is pulled out through the second incision, and then remove it from the incision above.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do this until you extract that part from the highest or uppermost incision of all the incisions, until it is completely pulled out; and then cut that part.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you cannot extract and lift it, then insert a needle with a strong double thread and tie it and pull it out, or insert the probe and rotate your hand in all directions until it is removed.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And be careful that it is not cut; for if it is broken, it will be difficult for you to lift it out and it may harm the patient.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And once you have completely removed it, then place on the wound site wool soaked in wine and oiled olive and un-oiled olive, and care for it until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vein is contracted with a twisting that involves its segments, and it is not straight as we have said it should be, then you must incise along all parts of its twisting and at the points where it twists around itself, and then suspend it with hooks until you lift it entirely.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And be careful with your incision so that you do not cut into the vein and damage it, for it will be difficult for you to raise it back up; and use caution in this matter.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:
Forma de unci orp:	Forma de unci orp:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.
De extraccio venae cruris.	From the extraction of the vein from the leg.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the chests of people in hot lands, just as in Al-Andalus in the land of Arabs and in the hot and dry lands of India with little moisture, where there is no grass or tree. 
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And often it is generated in other parts of the body besides the lungs. 
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And the generation of it is from putrefaction that comes from the chain thus as serpents, worms, lice, and maggots are generated between the chain and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of the susceptibility to the occurrence is this vein where you find inflammation in the chest very strong; then the area is blistered; and then the vein starts to emerge from that blistery place which resembles a plant rash.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And when the limb appears, then it is necessary that you wrap around it a piece of lead which weighs one drachm within two drachms, and secure that and leave the lead hanging from the beam.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And as many times as you move it away from him due to some external cause, wrap that in lead and secure it.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the swelling is prolonged, then you cut a part of it and wrap up the remainder; and do not cut that which is tightly constricted within until it has been brought out, for if you cut that which is contracted, it will go into the flesh and cause an abscess, pus formation in the area, and a bad ulceration.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	Because it is necessary that it be treated gently and extracted bit by bit until it is completely removed from the body and no part of it remains in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein, it extends in some men to a length of five palms and ten, and I have even heard of one reaching twenty palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is to be cut during the time of its treatment, then insert the needle into the channel and pierce that area with a long channel through the flesh until all the material inside is evacuated. Administer putrefaction to the area for several days with medicines; then treat it according to the cure for abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein sometimes has branches, especially when it approaches the joint of the foot or within the foot, and it comes out through multiple openings, with a branch extending from each opening.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And therefore, treat that as we have said in the division and with what has been said above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	On the section concerning worms generated under the skin and it is called bovine disease.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is called in some regions the bovine disease because small white spots appear on the belly, and it is a kind of worm that originates between the skin and the flesh, and moves throughout the body up and down, and is felt moving from one member to another until it breaks through the skin and comes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its generation is due to the putrefaction of certain humors, just as worms, serpents, and worms like earthworms and roundworms are generated in the stomach.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared for its malice, because when it moves through the body and reaches the head, and gets to the eye, it then causes a strong infection in it and enters and destroys the eye, which results in white spots appearing.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And therefore, when you want to treat and extract it, do so only according to its movement and appearance as felt. Then you must tighten what is above it and below it with binding and strong compression, and then dry it out and extract it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is embedded in the flesh and you do not find it, then place a heated cautery over the area where it lies, and the greatest danger feared is corruption of the area, which corrupts the location as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	Of the incision for the illness nafir.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is called nafir in our land, and it is pain that comes to some members, and then moves from member to member.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And I have already seen that second thing which I will recount to you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was called to see a sick woman in a village, and after uncovering her arm, I saw a small swelling in the vein of her arm. After staying there for about an hour, I observed that swelling moving up the arm like a worm, though more lightly, as if it were quicksilver flowing from one place to another.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then it moved to the pain in that area and entered the muscle, and then it stayed there for about an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then it moved to the other arm before reaching the other side of the body.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then it returned to me, moving throughout her body as I observed; and I was greatly amazed by its transformation and the speed at which it moved from one member to another.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had seen this before in my other patients in the same manner; however, I have seen many cases where the pain is transferred from one limb to another.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But do not see this with the eyes as in a woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I did not think it was anything else but that it is because the woman was of old age, or of dry body and exposed veins, and in this condition feels this altered wind.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that this reverse cure does not appear in those who are delicate and have a moist body with engorged veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you wish to treat him and the patient feels that pain, then it is not apparent to you as we have said, then you press on that area lightly and cut into it where that constricted wind has settled, and cauterize the spot.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not find it with your hands, then cure that by means of a body purge and by expelling windiness, and treat those with foul pills and pills of senna and the like.
De extraccio de sagetas.	From the extraction of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are diverse according to their types, and according to the places in the body where they strike, for their diversity is such that some have large points, and small ones, and concave ones, and blunt ones; and there are those with three prongs, and those which have barbs; and there are also those with blades.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And the manner in which they strike the limbs and parts is of two kinds: for the limbs are either principal organs, such as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar ones; therefore when it strikes one of these organs and signs of death appear to you, which I will describe shortly, then you should avoid extracting the arrow in those cases where death is imminent. And when these bad signs do not appear to you, and the arrow is not hidden deep within the limb, then you extract that arrow and treat the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And the signs of injury to the skull are when an arrow strikes it, pierces the bone, and reaches the dura mater which is over the brain; for there follows severe headache, blindness, dizziness, inflammation and heat in the eyes, inflammation and heat of the tongue, spasms, confusion of mind, vomiting of bile, sudden loss of speech, destruction of voice, and a white, powdery moisture similar to flour oozing from the wound site, and the appearance of the face changes as if the flesh were moistened.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And therefore if these signs appear to you, then abstain from the treatment and extraction of the arrow, unless it is outside.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	And the signs of the arrow when it is shot into the heart, so that it is near the left nipple, and you feel that it is fixed in a hard place, not a soft one; and the movement of the arrow is similar to the pulse's movement, and black blood flows from the wound, and there is coldness in the extremities, and cold sweat, and fainting; therefore you know that death descends swiftly.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the signs when the arrow has wounded the lung are spitting out frothy blood from the wound, and the vessels near the neck are inflamed, and the color of the patient changes, and they expire a great spirit, and they seek a draft of fresh air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow strikes the membrane that is in the feet, and the pain is near the small bones, and there is great swelling with intense pain and sighing, and not all the muscles of the limbs are affected.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if you find an arrow in the stomach, then remove it from the infected food that is undigested. 
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the arrow is embedded in the abdomen and has entered it, make an incision at the wound site, or through the skin, to access the intestine that has been ruptured; there is no hope for recovery if the extraction of the arrow is not performed.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow hits the bladder and urine comes out from it, and some process causes something to move outward from within, and there is great pain on the patient, then you know that it is mortal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	And the other parts as well, such as the face, neck, jaw, shoulders, arms, vertebrae of the back, clavicle, thigh, chest, and similar members, are saved according to the major dispositions when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery and is not a venomous arrow.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I will recount to you what I have observed about the nature of these arrows, so that you may understand this in relation to your treatment.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause is that in one instance, an arrowhead was embedded in the lacrimal duct of the eye near the base of the nose, and I extracted it from the other side, leaving the earwax untouched, and he was healed, without any harm to his eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I extracted another arrow from a Jew who had been struck in the gray area of his eye, leaving the eyelid somewhat untouched. The arrow was already hidden, and only a small part of it could be reached to which the shaft adhered. It was a large sharp arrow of the Turks, with a lion-shaped iron head that had no fletching.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And it is beneficial for the patient, and not accidental that a bad accident happens to him in his health.
