Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Here is the translation of the provided line:
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina,
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For the operation with the hand is laid bare in our region and in our time completely devoid of practice, such that the knowledge of it has become weak, and its traces remain; and nothing remains of it except some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have been altered by many and led to errors and superstitions, such that the meanings of it are closed off and its strength and art have diminished.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it seems to me that I will revitalize that through the organization of this treatise according to the method of exposition and explanation and abbreviation; and so that it comes with the forms of the cautery tools and other instruments of the work, along with the addition of the explanation, and the preparation of them, which is necessary for the cause.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	But the reason why no skilled practitioner is found with their hand in our time is that the art of medicine is long and requires its practitioner to be exercised in the science of anatomy, which Galen mentions as necessary for knowing the functions of the members and their forms, and the connections and separations between them; and having knowledge of the bones, nerves, and ligaments, and their number and distribution; and of the pulsating veins and the quiet ones, and the locations of their emergence.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And by this Hippocrates means that the name matters less, but in the deed it is small, and especially in the art of the hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	But we have already spoken of this in the introduction of this book; for whoever is not knowledgeable about what we have said about anatomy will not be able to avoid making mistakes that can lead to death, as I have seen many such cases, for some are so inexperienced in this science and stray from true knowledge and experience.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For I saw an inexperienced and foolish doctor incise a scrophular abscess on a woman's neck, and in doing so cut some arteries of the neck, causing great bleeding which led to the woman dying in the arms of those present.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another doctor who attempted to remove a stone from a man who had complained about his condition, and the stone was large. The doctor came to him and removed that stone along with a piece of the bladder, because of which that man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I myself attempted to remove it, and saw that due to the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, I recognized that he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I saw another doctor who received payment from a duke of our land for surgery, and he encountered a black castrated man who had a fracture in his thigh. The doctor, with his ignorance, attempted to set the fracture by tightly binding the wound with pillows and splints without allowing any expansion or breathing room for the injury.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And then release the binding according to their wishes, and dress the wound, and keep it dry for some days and command that we loosen the bandage; and this is done until the thigh and foot are free from inflammation, and they recover. 
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I was called to him, and prepared to loosen the binding, and peace was achieved and relief from his pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But if corruption had already set in the limb, because it could not be restrained, and the corruption did not cease to spread within the limb until the patient was in peril.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And you saw another doctor who perforated a cancerous abscess, and it became ulcerated over the course of several days, during which time the malignancy increased under the care of its master.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	Here is the translation of the provided line:
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And by this, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation with my hand be divided into two divisions: one is an operation which is associated with health, and in work with which there is danger in the greatest precautions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor;
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore take up your weapons with diligence and protection of God, and your patients with happiness and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best way for the grace of God to lead you to health and favorable progress, and leave behind terrible illnesses that are difficult to heal, and keep at bay what makes you fear, so that hesitation in your faith and in your name does not escape you: for it remains more beneficial to your glory, and more in this world and beyond to your sanctities.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	When translating this text line by line into English, we interpret "Gualia" as a name or title for a section and "diyssec" likely means "divides" or "separates." Here's the translation:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Do not treat a bad illness, for fear that you might be called a bad doctor.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have already divided this book into three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter is ordered from head to foot, in the forms of instruments and in the tools of cauters, and of what is necessary in the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, on drying and piercing, and on cupping, and on plasters, and on the extraction of arrows and similar objects, all chaptered and ordered according to the forms of the instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	The division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the treatment of fractures and similar conditions; a chapter ordered from head to foot, and concerning the forms of the instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	On cauteries with fire and with sharp medicine and a recollection of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	With that, the treatise on the entire book begins.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	It is necessary for me to say the quality of the benefits of that cautery and the harms of it, and in what conditions the use of cautery is prohibited.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore, I say that the discourse on the quality of the benefit and harm of cautery is long and prolix, subtle through science, and secret hidden; many wise people have already spoken about it, and they disagree on it, and for me, a little of their discourses suffices, fearing lengthiness.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore it is said that cautery benefits all complications universally, whether they are with matter or without matter, except for two complications which are complications without matter.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the dry and hot complication with matter, opinions are divided; for some say that cautery is helpful for that, while others say the opposite, that cautery is not appropriate for a disease caused by heat and dryness, because the nature of fire is heat and dryness, and it is inappropriate to treat a hot and dry disease with something that is burnt and dry.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And let it be said by those who argue the opposite, that cautery provides relief in all hot and dry diseases that occur in human bodies, because when you compare the body of a person and its moisture to the nature of fire, you find that the human body is cold. 
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say by the speech of that person, who has experienced this already several times openly.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	However, this does not apply to those who are already experienced and trained in the chapter of cauterization through prior practice, and have understood the diversity of human composition and the disposition of diseases within themselves, and their causes, as well as the accidents related to them, and the duration of time for these.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	But in other compositions, there is no need for fear, especially in cold and humid diseases, because all doctors agree on these, and they do not disagree about treating them with cauterization.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, sons, that the secret of healing through cauterization with fire and its effectiveness lies in the use of medicinal combustion. This is because fire is simple, and its action only reaches the member being cauterized without significantly harming the adjacent members.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	However, the action of medicinal combustion can affect those members that are adjacent, often causing difficult-to-heal diseases in the affected member and severely aggravating them.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	However, fire, by its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, does not do this but rather purges. We have come to know this through experience and long study of the art regarding the truth of causes; and for that reason, I am excused from the lengthiness of speech. But if it were not for the fact that it is not read in my book during this brief pause, I would hide the secret with fire and the quality of its operation on bodies and its expulsion, by which diseases are expelled, demonstrated philosophically, which would sharpen your perceptions.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, sons, that they forget the time in which it is appropriate to perform cauterization and miss the best time of spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that cautery is appropriate at all times, in order to submerge the harm caused by accidental time in the healing of what is drawn by the cautery, and especially if the cautery is for necessary pains or urgent pains, strong and sudden, which do not tolerate delay because it is feared that malice may arise, which is greater than a small harm entering over time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And this does not fall into your feet, or, sons, this is esteemed only by the vulgar people and foolish doctors, so it is that for that disease which is healed by cautery it is not always recommended, and they pause at that consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not as they think it to be due to this, for cautery is merely a substitute for medicine which alters the composition and dries out the humidity that causes the pain.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	And yet, cauteries are excessive in medicine due to the desire for its health benefits and the power of its operation and the greatness of its lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that his illness may return at some time in the future, according to the constitution of the patient and the location of their illness, and their strength, and what is prepared within their body due to the accumulation of excesses, and what has been acquired through food and similar causes; but if the illness for which a cautery is administered is an illness subtle in limbs with few excesses and moistures, like a tooth cautery for pain and similar treatments, it is possible that such pain will not return to them, though this happens rarely.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And it is commonly said that cautery is the last resort of medicine, and this saying is true, not in the way many understand it, for I believe that there is no cure that truly helps without medicine or any other cause before resorting to cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is contrary to that; the idea that cautery is the last resort of medicine is only true when we administer methods of cure in certain illnesses and those medicines do not confer benefit, and then at the end of all other treatments, cautery is administered, and it does help in that case.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And here, it is said that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the understanding that the common people and many foolish doctors have.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the ancients said that a cautery with gold is better than one with iron, and they did not say this without considering the equality of gold and the excellence of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the place of cautery does not burn, as this is not absolutely true, for I have experienced it and found that it only happens in some bodies and not others, and cautery with that method is good and better than with iron as they say; however, when you do cautery with fire on gold, it is not declared to you, for it ignites according to the quantity you want due to the purity of the gold, and because it prepares to receive heat; and if you place it over the ignition the gold melts from the fire, and some flakes fall into the fire which the craftsman cuts off due to the occupation of that. 
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And by this method, cautery is performed with an iron applied lightly and more precisely for the sake of the correctness of the operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already organized this chapter on cautery into sections, and have ordered those of the head among the feet, so that the inquirer may easily find what they want from it. 
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	From a cautery for headache caused by coldness and humidity.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cautery addresses humidity and coldness on the affected area, which are the causes of excessive rheumatic flux, called running, from the head to the regions of the eyes and ears, and also causes excessive sleepiness, toothache, and jaw pain, and generally all diseases that come from coldness, such as paralysis, dropsy, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cautery is as follows: first, order the patient to be purged with a laxative medicine for three or four nights, according to the strength of the patient, their age, and their habits.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command him to shave his head with a razor. Then have the patient sit between your hands on a lowered bench and place his hands on his feet.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then place the tip of your palm near the nostrils between his eyes.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, when the middle part of the area has been reached, mark that spot with a probe, and then apply the olive-shaped cautery, which is in this form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then place that over the marked area with cloth, in such a way that it descends, with which your hand is gradually constrained, and you turn that.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then lift your hand gently and look at the area, and if you see any part of the bone exposed, about the size of a grain of barley, then raise your hand, and if it does not come back with that tool, use another one instead, if it has cooled down, until the bone is seen as I have told you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a little salt and dissolve it over the area and leave it there for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then place over it a cloth soaked in butter and leave it there until the heat of the burn is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with a tetrapharmacum ointment until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And they also say that when the wound remains open, it is better to wash it with milk, because it is better and more beneficial.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And some of them say that the area around the bone should be cauterized, and the cautery should be held until some part of the substance of the bone adheres to it.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then remove what is adhering to the bone, and then clean it.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And others said that with the cautery, one should reach the buttocks, pressing strongly on the bone until it gives way, and this is the method of performing a small alfahcati. 
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they believe that from that place, vapors rise from the head.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And if the wound is kept open for a long time, then it should be treated before it becomes solidified.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	But I have not seen these two types of cautery used on everyone, but only on some people out of fear; and leave that aside, you must tell me that it is better for health when it happens; for the head is afflicted by a discontinuity in its structure as we have testified in other members, and especially so when the patient's head is of a delicate nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first type of cautery is safer and better, you must tell me; and with that method and by working in this way, it is more healthful.
Capitol segon.	Chapter two.
Del cauteri del cap.	About the cautery of the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When chronic and long-lasting pain affects the entire head and this condition persists in the patient, and treatments such as poultices, cochlias (a type of medication), capipurgations (head purgings), plasters, washes, caustics, gualinas (a kind of plaster or unguent), and similar remedies have been used without success, especially if a cautery has already been applied with little to no improvement; then consider whether the patient's head is of strong constitution by nature and not delicate, and if there is considerable heat present. In such a case, apply another type of cautery, different from the previous one.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then apply cautery over the horn on his head with an internal cautery until the tumor is separated. 
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the cord and expose the bone to the extent we have recounted and cauterize that area with a cautery on the rear part of the head in the spot which is called the sinus — and it is that spot where the suction cup is placed.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And move your hand in this manner, and do not expose the bone, for the patient will find much greater pain from this than from the pain of all other cauteries on the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I want to describe this cautery in its place, for the cautery with which you cauterize the horns of the head and the occiput is a finer cautery than that with which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is its form.
Capitol ters.	Chapter three.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	On the cautery of non-traditional migraines.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When pain settles in the part of the head or spreads within the eye, the head should be cleansed with medicines, and other treatments, which I have described in the sections on diseases, should be administered; and if all this does not help, then cautery is applied in two ways: either by cauterization with a sharp burning medicine or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	And a cautery with burning medicine is what you should take a cloth, and clean that and bind the extremities of it from both ends.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then you cut into the painful area on the temple with a slanted lancet so that blood is let at that spot until it is concealed.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And then apply force over it with a bandage by continuous pressure, and leave it for the span of three hours; and then remove it and place the wound exposed, and let the injury be untreated for two or three days, and then place on it an ointment submerged in water until the area becomes red.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with an ointment until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish, do this with some caustic medicines which I have written about in the two treatises on caustic medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	But the cautery should be done with an iron according to this method: make it with a cautery iron which has the following form:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	It is called a "claw" or "clavilh," because the end of it resembles the shape of a clove with some curvature, and in the middle part of it there is a small prominence.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And then place it on the site of the pain, and keep your hand steady — so that the artery below does not adhere to it — and rotate the iron little by little with speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the quantity of what is adhered by the pressure of the chain is such that it reaches half of it, lift your hand so that the artery below is not pressed, so that blood flow does not occur.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then soak a cloth in salt water and place it on the area, and leave it there for three days; and then apply a cloth smeared with ointment, and treat it with unguent until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you do, cauterize with the tip of the cautery iron as if it were a cautery, and be careful not to cut an artery in this modern non-traditional way. 
Capitol quart.	Capitol quart.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	From the cauterization of ancient migraine treatment.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat migraines using what we have said about the previous treatment and what we have mentioned in the divisions of diseases, and if the treatment does not improve, and sometimes due to the disease, the initial cautery with medicine or cautery with fire that we have described is not enough, then it becomes necessary for you to burn a knife-shaped cautery until it turns white, and mark the location of the pain with a line as long as half your finger, or similar; and place your hand over it once and press until you reach the artery and get to the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to be careful with the movement of the jaw, which is affected by chewing, and that the muscle is not adhered and the nerves that affect it are not spasming.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it concerns the protection and caution of the blood flow from an artery that is to be cut, for there is fear in cutting it, especially for those who are ignorant of what they do and are not studious or experienced; and they leave the operation at its beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And I will come with a reminder of the regimen for accidental blood flow from an artery according to its method, in its place within this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see that this disease does not respond to this cautery and the body of the patient is tolerable, apply the cautery in the middle of the head as we have described, and treat the plague until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you wish, administer the cautery which we have described in the chapter on arrow wounds with a cautery having two blades, and this is a better and more appropriate cautery.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	On the cautery of ear pains.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When pain in the ear comes from cold and is treated with laxatives and with the other treatments I have mentioned in the division, and if the pain is not relieved, then apply the cautery. This cautery is called "puncta," and it has the following form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And then apply the puncta near the ignition, and move it around the entire ear as a wheel is turned, or along the circumference of each part if the pain is in each part.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Extend yourself with the cauterizing instrument from the tip of the earlobe little by little until you have sensed the area with your fingers. 
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery of these points is done throughout the entire ear, and clean that area, then treat the places in between so they may heal.
Capitol .vi.	Capitol .vi.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	From the cautery of turtle.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cautery of the type that can lead to drying out or nerve spasm.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that kind of tumor with scrapings and purgatives and fomentations, and if your treatment does not help, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries: the first on the earlobe, the second a little below the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And place your cautery on the opposite side of the diseased part, for moistening does not occur except in the part that appears healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the form of cautery is to cauterize that area with a cautery at the tip of the uppermost earlobe, slightly above the horn of the head, and on another temple, the length of which should be according to the length of the little finger, and then place your hand with the cautery until half the thickness of the cord is burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cautery, which is a special type of knife, the shape of which is described above.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	But however more subtle it is than that one somewhat as you see; and it is necessary to adjust in place of excessive thickness a bit.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with what has been previously prepared until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	It seems like you've provided a chapter or section heading that appears to be ".vii.", which in Roman numerals translates to "7". If this is part of a larger text, it would indicate the start of Chapter Seven or Section Seven. Could you provide more context or additional lines for a fuller translation and explanation? Without further content, I can only suggest that this heading signifies the beginning of the seventh chapter or section in whatever document or manuscript you're referring to.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	This title appears to be in a language similar to medieval Latin or an early Romance language and refers to the topic of cautery (cauterization) for an ancient form of apoplexy. Here is the translation into English:
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is chronic and has been treated with the methods we have mentioned but your treatment does not take effect and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize that area with four cauteries: on all the corners of their head; and with one cautery at the middle of the head, as we have said; and with one cautery on the nape.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the method of the cautery is done according to what has been said above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it has already been cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; it is more towards the back; then it should be treated with whatever process you use.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	On cauterization for forgetfulness caused by smoke.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	At the beginning, give the patient large jujubes and pills to cleanse the kidneys.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	Then shave the entire head of the patient and place a plaster made of cerate, as described in the treatise on plasters, on their nape.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And apply that several times, for that is a method of cautery.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do this according to the doctor's order, which I have already mentioned.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And thus if healing is good by those means; and if not, then apply three cauteries to the lower part of his head, which should descend from the highest part of the head towards the part closer to the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And place between each cautery the width of a thick finger, and then treat the cautery as has been described.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	But if you want to increase it and the patient can tolerate that, then apply the cautery in the middle; and if you want to increase it more, now cauterize over both sides.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Then treat that until it heals; and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to the form previously given.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On the cautery of the pancreas and the relaxation of the entire body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Cover that you proceed in the modification of the head with scrapers and with what we have said; then shave the patient's head, and then cauterize it using a cautery at the center of the head, and with a cautery on all the corners of the head, and with a cautery on the back part of it, and with three cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the illness of excessive softening of the body and the patients tolerate it and the illness is strong, then cauterize that area with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and finally with a cautery inside where the muscle of the spine is compressed, and lift your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And then treat that which needs healing, and this should be done with an olive cautery.
Capitol .x.	It seems like you've provided a section marker, "Capitul .x.", which likely indicates the start of chapter or section ten in a text. Without additional content following this marker, there isn't any specific text to translate or explain further. If you have more text from this chapter that needs translation or explanation, please provide it!
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Regarding the cautery for epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	The epileptic is not cauterized unless the epilepsy is due to phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And thus, you must cleanse the brain of the patient at the beginning with herbs and with the other treatment that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is severe and can tolerate the exception of the medicines. 
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who cannot tolerate the medicines, then administer smaller doses and have the servant grind them down, doing this for several days beforehand, with an improvement in the food.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize that with a cautery in the middle of the head according to the previous method, and with another cautery on the back of the head, and on each temple of the head, cauterize it as well.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize that with the cauteries I have mentioned, to induce paralysis and relaxation of the body over the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And let it be an olive cautery according to what is mentioned earlier.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is a child, then use a gentle cautery according to this method.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On the cauterization for melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humors and thick phlegm, then cauterize that with the cauteries we have mentioned to induce paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is an excess that turns to melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give them something to drink that purifies their brain according to what has been previously stated in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And then shave the head of the patient, and then make a properly made circle on the scalp, and then place that in the middle of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And the patient should be made to sit down, and should be held from all sides.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	Then apply an ointment; and it is better to use sheep's fat.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And warm that over the fire with moderate heating, which the said patient can tolerate when it is applied to them.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	Then place that on the top of their head in the circle and massage it inside so that it is rubbed in.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do this with the patient once a week for an entire week, along with other good treatments until they are healed; or if you wish, cauterize that area by making small points according to the worst part of it, but hold your hand with a cautery arranged in this way: this is a special kind of cautery which moistens the brain equally.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	Then place that cloth dipped in fat or in goose grease.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On the cautery of water descending into the bile.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When it is declared that the beginning of water in the head has been signaled by the signs which I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give to the patient something that purifies his head, and protect it from all moistures.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And let that person sweat in a bath for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	Then command them to shave their head, and cauterize that spot at the center of the head; then cauterize that area with two cauteries on both temples if it is the beginning of a watery discharge from both eyes, or on one side if it starts from one eye.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Use the cautery to incise all the veins and arteries that are below the chain; place the cauteries at that length along the breadth of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And be careful of blood flow when cauterizing; and if you see any blood flow, stop it using some medicine that is available to you.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And come with the knowledge of how to extract arteries and cut them off, and be cautious of blood flow.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And sometimes it is cauterized at the neck below two bones with two backward-pointing cauteries.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	Of the cauterization of old tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears from the eyes are long-standing and move through the veins and arteries which are in the manifest location on the head outside, and it is verified that this is a cold superfluity of phlegm, then cauterize that area with a cautery as we have recounted in the chapter about the beginning of water falling into the eyes, and with a cautery at the middle part of the head, and with two cauteries on both temples, and with two cauteries on both bones [likely referring to the temporal bones or similar structures] on the skull.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if additional treatment is needed, then cauterize that area on the entire side of the eye socket above the end of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	On the cauterization for nasal odor.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat that condition with what we have mentioned in the division and your treatment does not improve, then prepare and give the patient to drink decoctions for three nights; then shave the head of the patient, and cauterize it with a medium-sized olive wood cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then cauterize that area with a clover-shaped cautery using two cauteries on both eyebrows, leaving the hair slightly untouched.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And be careful of the artery so that you do not burn it.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And this is the form of the claw-shaped cautery.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On the cautery for softening the eyelids of wounds.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the eye is softened by illness or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with this lunar cautery; and this is its form:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you do, cauterize that area above both eyebrows a little with two cauteries in all parts, and extend them towards the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the size of the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard with your hand using the cautery, but to the extent that one-third of the eyelid is adhered.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	On the cautery of the eyelid of the eye when the hairs turn inward and pierce the eye.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hairs inside the nose are converted into internal parts so that they cause nasal pain, cautery is applied in two ways, either with iron or with a burning medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you burn with fire, command the patient before this to remove their hairs just as they do when they are shaved, ensuring that they are extended and smoothed; and if you do this at the roots, then hold the skin tightly with a bandage so that it is not wrinkled until the hairs grow back.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	When the hairs have grown back and are smoothed out, then place the head of the patient in your lap, and then apply something over the eyelids of their eyes with a template, which should be shaped like a leaf of merta, and the beginning of the template should be close to the hair.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	Then place something embedded in egg white or in a poultice of flour on the eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	Then heat the cautery, which has this shape.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	Then cauterize over the area you have marked, little by little, in visible spots, until the surface of the chain-like area, which is shaped like a myrtle leaf, is thoroughly burned and clearly apparent.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And a sign of the healthiness of your work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted and the hairs around it raised due to the puncture of the eye.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And therefore lift your hand and leave it for three days, then place it on the swelling with a bandage until the pus is drained.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with an ointment until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	And if any cause returns through the hairs near their root and the eyelid is softened, then apply the cautery to that area again just as you did initially.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	But if the hairs are on the eyelid, then cauterize that area until it is raised to its natural position and smoothed out so that the hairs do not irritate the eye.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But the cautery with burning medicine commands the patient to pluck the hairs until they are elongated and smoothed out, and then make a shape like a miter leaf from linen cloth.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And then take some known soap and fresh ingredients amounting to an ounce or so, and thoroughly mix those ingredients quickly so that they are not cooled; then spread this mixture over the cloth shaped like a miter leaf, and place it on one or both eyes; place a piece of egg white over the eye, and keep the patient's head in your hand.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And place the finger on the medicine and press it slightly and do not push it in until the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for the bite is felt by him as if it were fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And when you perceive that the tumor has a biting sensation, then apply the medicine and leave it there as directed; once the biting sensation ceases, remove the medicine and wash the wound with water; now consider if the eyelid is already raised as washed, you should remove the constriction with fire or incision, because now it is good; and if not, return to applying the medicine on the spot where it has not pressed and does not darken until your operation is completed and the skin contracts.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	Then place a pad on the wound with bandages until the chain of adhesion is removed, and then treat it with an unguent or another remedy until it is healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you to carefully monitor your operation so that no residue of the medicine falls into the wound. If the eyelid softens after several days and any hairs begin to protrude into the wound, then reapply your medicine to the area where the eyelid has softened, just as you did at the beginning, and continue this treatment until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the form of the mirtle leaf. 
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And know that the veins of men are diverse according to their size and smallness, and therefore according to this your treatment should be adjusted.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And do not hide the path to correctness from one who is studying this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On the cautery of a fistula that is in the lacrimal duct of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula as we have described in the sections on diseases and your treatment does not work, then you must cauterize it according to this method: command the patient to place their head on your shoulder, and let another assistant hold the patient’s head between your hands in such a way that the head is neither tilted nor moved.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	Then place a cloth dipped in egg white or in a poultice of lint over the eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then ignite the cautery, which has the following form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which should be hollow, like the shape of a reed or a vulture feather, at one end with which the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you want, proceed by entering through the other extremity.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you wish, do it in this manner as you attempt.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	But however, the one that is concave is better for this work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	Then press the fistula if it is open, and draw out the pus and dry that area.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	Then place on it the cautery which is well ignited, and hold that with your hand a little away from the nostril's opening, so that your hand does not tremble or the patient becomes agitated, and then place the cautery in the area of the nostril and burn that area.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And if at the beginning of your cautery you penetrate into the bone, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice, as necessary; and leave it thus for three days, and then place a bandage over the wound and surround it with a drying ointment until it heals.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	And if ten days have passed and it has not healed, then apply an acute corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed and scrape it according to what is suitable in its chapter. 
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And here is the translation of the provided source sentence:
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cauterization and treatment, that is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer a thread through the nose and reduce the fistula to the body of the nose according to how it will come into its proper place.
Capitol .xviii.	It seems like you've provided a chapter or section heading, "Capitol .xviii.", which likely translates to "Chapter Eighteen" in English. If you have any specific text from this chapter that needs translation or explanation, feel free to share it!
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	This phrase appears to be describing the cautery of an anal fissure. A translation into English would be:
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Spots appear causing cracks in the lips, and especially in the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	So when you treat those cracks with what we have said in the divisions and your treatment does not improve, then apply a small knife cautery according to this method that is shown.
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And let the depth of it be according to the fineness of the area.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then gently place that heated cautery into those cracks until the cautery reaches the bottom of the cracks.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	Then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On the cautery of a fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When an abscess develops at the root of the uvula or on the palate or at the roots of the teeth, and then it swells, and then it bursts, and then it becomes chronic, and pus flows out forming a fistula, and if your treatment does not improve its healing, then you should heat a cautery according to the size that fits into the fistula. Then insert this heated cautery into the tract of the fistula, holding your hand until the hot iron reaches the bottom of it; this is done once or twice at the end. Then treat it with what we have said about treatment until it heals.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And therefore, if the pus is separated and healed, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the area and remove the corrupted bone according to what will be detailed in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	And therefore, if the pus is separated and healed, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the area and remove the corrupted bone according to what will be detailed in Chapter .xx.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On cautery of the teeth and on the softening of the veins.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the veins are softened by humidity and the teeth are painful, and if treatment with medicines does not work, then place the head of the patient on your knee, and then apply the cautery in the form that will be described shortly. In this way, you should place the tube over the tooth and quickly insert the ignited cautery into it, holding your hand slightly inside so that the patient feels the heat of the fire reach the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	Then remove your hand, and then repeat the cautery several times as desired.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	Then the patient should rinse their mouth with salt water and keep it in for an hour, after which they should spit it out. This will stop the painful tooth, strengthen the softened gum, and dry out the corrupted moisture.
Capitol .xxi.	Capitol .xxi.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	Of cauterization for toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When tooth pain is due to coldness, or if there is decay or worm, or if you do not successfully treat it with medicine, then cauterize in that area in two ways: either cauterize with cow's horn, or cauterize with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cauterization with horn is when you take the horn of cows and boil it in iron water, then take some and wrap it around the tip of a probe, and then apply that boiled horn to the painful tooth until it cools down. 
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then repeat that several times until the heat from the fire reaches the root of the teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you want, soak wool or cloth in the above-mentioned solution, and place it on the painful tooth, and place a heated iron over it until the heat reaches the inside of the tooth cavity.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	But however, when cauterization with fire is done, you should pay attention to the canula of iron or bronze, and there should be some roughness in the core so that the sharpness of the fire reaches the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then ignite the cautery, which will take its form, and place it on the tooth while holding your hand inside so that the cautery is heated; and do this several times until the pain subsides either on that day or the next day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And it is necessary that by the application of that cautery, the patient fills their mouth with good food and holds it for an hour and then spits it out; and this is the form of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize whichever extremity according to what is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the form of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On the cauterization of exstrophy. 
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When the external swellings are due to phlegm and cold humors and do not obey digestion through medicines and you wish to digest those lightly, then ignite the cautery which has a form as follows, having two hooked ends so that smoke can escape from one end of the cautery, and place that heated part over the swelling once, and again if necessary until it reaches the core of the swelling.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the swelling is small, then place the cautery according to the size of the swelling, and afterwards leave it for three days and place it over the area until what the fire has burned is completely removed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	Then treat it with ointment and bandages until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the form of the cannula or such a cautery is as follows.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On the cautery for hoarseness of voice and constriction of the windpipe.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When the humidities come upon the canal of the lung, and especially when this is due to cold constitution, then it is necessary that the patient be purged at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that area by placing the cautery near the opening of the throat.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And be careful not to reach the ankle with the cautery nor burn more than a little of the tendon.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize that area with another cautery over the joint of the neck at the last vertebra.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And the cautery of it should be done with a nail according to the previous method.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that area in the manner that is described to ensure it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On the cautery treatment for lung disease and cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung disease are caused by infiltrating humidities, and the patient does not have fever or tuberculosis and the illness is long-standing, then apply cautery to that area with two cauteries on the furcula at the points where the ribs meet the breastbone; and with another cautery in the middle of the foot between the two mounds; and let the cautery be done with a nail according to the previous form.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, let your cautery be done by pricking with a cautery that is called puncta, the form of which you have described previously in the puncture for ear pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And let there be points inserted at those places; then treat that area in the manner described to ensure it is healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And here is the translation for the provided line:
Capitol .xxv.	Capitol .xxv.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	From the cautery of a tic, which is the head of the artery.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the joint is dislocated due to lubricating humidity and does not stay fixed at its return time, you should place its dislocation back into where it usually belongs, and then with a small movement it will be relocated as we have witnessed; therefore, first reduce the dislocation, and then lay the patient on their back or side; then lift the chain that is inside the socket towards the upper parts using the fingers of your left hand if the joint is dislocated inward.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then light the cautery having two heads; and this is its form:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the chain before it penetrates into the other side; and the figure of the cauterization will come with four-headed cautery.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And thus those subtle ones depend on the amount of tension; and this is its form:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And sometimes it is adjusted according to this method, and that is why the cauteries are eight.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then place porous sticks with salt on the cautery; and then apply the patient to tranquility, and the limb should not be moved for some time until it is strengthened.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is in the upper parts and this is done quickly, then cauterize over the muscle with a needle cautery or with several pointed cauters, for the joint is confirmed, the humidity is diminished, and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Capitol .xxvi.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	Of the cauterization of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When cold and moist humors enter the stomach and separate from its natural composition and multiply worms within it, and if you continue with the methods of treatment without any change, then the patient should lie on their back with their arms and legs extended. Then cauterize that area with three cauteries: place one cautery under the feet at the length of a finger using a nail cautery, and with two other cauteries place them beside each side of the first cautery so that they form a triangular pattern; space them out enough to ensure they cause ulceration.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is two-thirds the thickness of the chain. 
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And let the shape of the cautery be according to this form with this addition: And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this shall be a cautery according to the shape of a circle according to this form.
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And let the stomach be punctually cauterized for those who are frightened by this cautery: it is that you place upon the stomach points according to the quantity you wish with testing, and then cauterize those points with a cautery; and then treat that with the cure which precedes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	On the cauterization of cold feet.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When pain in the feet occurs due to cold or moisture or excessive wind such that it is thrown off from its normal composition by superfluous discharge, and if the patient is treated with what we have said but does not improve, then the patient should be laid down on their back, and you place three cauteries according to this form and this quantity using a probe above the feet next to the hypochondria, taking care of the lying position of the person.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of the finger, and let the cautery be according to the length of the body straight.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not move the cautery with your hand.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the quantity that is added equals half the specific weight of the chain, and it is not adjusted more; and if the patient is standing on their feet; and if they are not standing, then let them lie down, with their limbs already extended, and raise their arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is possible for you to cauterize these areas with a knife-shaped cautery, when you are subtle and prudent in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And be careful not to overprocess during cauterization, and let the specific weight of the entire chain be added so that the whole body is affected and penetrates into the intestines, for the chain here is subtle; and be aware of this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	Of puncturing an abscess in the liver with a cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When there is an inflammation or abscess in the liver and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the liver or in its covering, then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the patient finds gravity and pain are intensified.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the covering of the liver, the pain is greatly intensified and often even exhausts the doctors' efforts to cure it.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, the patient should be placed face down on their cervit (likely referring to a type of support or cushion); then probe the area of the abscess with a tent (possibly a thin instrument); and then ignite the cautery which is shaped like a rod, the form of which was described on the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize with that same cautery until all the pus is dried up, until it reaches the core, until scab forms.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that abscess with the treatment used for other abscesses until it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And it is not necessary to use this form of cautery except by those whose study in the art of medicine has been prolonged, and among whom many diseases have been known; yet this one may sometimes dare on this operation, but still let us leave that to those who should do it, and it is better.
Capitol .xxix.	The text appears to be in an Old Romance language, likely a medieval form of one of the languages you mentioned. The provided lines are instructions or descriptions related to medical treatments. Here is the translation for the given source sentence:
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	From the context provided by the previous sentences, it appears that "plauresi" could be related to a specific medical condition or part of the body. Given the similarity to modern Romance languages and the context, "plauresi" might refer to "pleurisy," an inflammation of the lining around the lungs.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	Here is the translation line by line:
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then submerge it in oil and heat it over the fire, and then cauterize at that location which is between the continuation of the collarbone with the neck; and with two small cauteries guide them slightly towards the area below the chin, and with two cauteries on the part that declines between the fifth rib and the spine, slightly towards the rear parts; and with another cautery in the middle of the foot; and with another over the stomach, and with three cauteries at the rear parts; and with one cautery at the location which is between both shoulders, and with two cauteries on either side of the foot, placing the cautery that is between the two shoulders.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And you do not need to touch your hand with the cautery, but rather apply it to the surface of the chain (likely meaning a specific part of the body or an area marked for treatment) in action. 
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And already the ancients said that some men who use an iron cautery similar to a ray and heat it up, then place it in the location between the ribs, until they reach the abscess and the pus-filled sore, just as we have said regarding the abscess of the liver.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	And in this perforation with cautery there is no fear, for one does not die immediately when it happens at the site of the fistula which cannot be healed.
Capitol .xxx.	Capitol .xxx.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Of the cautery of the mesentery.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat the disease of the breast using what we have said about treatment in the division and if your treatment does not yield results, then apply cautery to them according to three ways, all of which are correct. One of these is to make three or four lines of cautery along the length of the breast, following the shape of the cauterizations for the liver, the form of which has been described previously.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And there should be the thickness of one finger or a little more between each cautery, and the method of the cautery should be the same method we have described for the liver cautery.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not cover your hand with the cautery; and the patient should be lying on their back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And another method of cauterization is to ignite the cautery very strongly, the reason for which we have described in the chapter on muscle dislocation, and lift the chain that is along the breast towards the side where the patient lies on their left.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And your elevation, by which you lift the chain, should be according to the length of the body, so that cauteries are made according to the width of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then insert the two heated cautery irons into that area through which you will introduce the chain from the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then remove the cautery; and thus four cauteries are made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you want, cauterize with a cautery having three burnings.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then you treat the cautery after it has stopped bleeding for several days, because it is more beneficial than other preceding causes in the treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On the cauterization of dropsy.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauterization is not used in dropsy except in certain specific cases properly.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you treat the dropsy using the methods of treatment that we have mentioned in the division and your treatment does not work, then it is necessary to cauterize with four cauteries around the navel, one cautery on the stomach, another cautery on the liver, another cautery on the spleen, two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, one cautery on the right side of the foot, and another cautery on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the quantity of the depth of the cautery should be proportional to the severity of the chain (injury or condition).
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And then leave the cautery open so that it burns for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the patient from treatment near the cautery with what is necessary because two intentions are added to it, and it will quickly aid in the healing process.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery with which the abdomen is cauterized is claw-like according to its previously described form, and the one with which the back is cauterized is olive-shaped according to its previously described form.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On the cauterization of the feet and thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are inflamed and swollen with watery humors, it is necessary to cauterize the feet on the back of the foot between the auricular and the ankle, lift your hand with the cautery and do not twist it; then raise your hand, but do not remove it completely, because the watery humor will drain out.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The cautery is in the following form: And then apply two cauteries on both thighs, and on each thigh, make a cautery using the blade end of the knife-shaped cautery.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And let the cautery be according to the length of the thigh: place one at the top and another in the middle of the thigh; and on each thigh, two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And leave the wound open for its healing for a long time so that some moisture may seep from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	Then treat the disease according to those causes which we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On the cautery of the abdominal area.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the abdominal area is weakened by cold and moisture inside, which debilitates the virtues, namely the digestive and retentive functions located in the stomach and intestines, it is treated with curative methods without delay. Sometimes patients are subjected to cautery that enhances these virtues; therefore, apply a large cautery on their stomach according to previous cauterization of the stomach, using a circular cautery and four cauteries around the delicate navel area with a subtle claw-shaped cautery; and use a cautery over the alvine region, either with a large cautery or with two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if you can expel the excessive humidity and the patient tolerates it, then cauterize that area on the groin and on the intestines, and strongly apply two cauteries to the stomach and near the inguinal region, for this is a perfectly effective cure from which there are no errors.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Capitol .xxxiv.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	Of the cauterization of old hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When it is in the nature of old hemorrhoids or one of thick humors infiltrating or corrupt humidity, and they are treated with what we have said in the division and you do not achieve your cure, then cauterize with three cauteries on the pus near the lower vertebrae and small triangular areas, and with a cautery above the navel by two fingers.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you suspect that the stomach of the patient is chilled and the food of the patient is not digested, and the face of the patient often becomes inflamed, then cauterize over the stomach with a large cautery as previously described; and with one cautery on the spleen, and with another cautery on the liver using a claw-shaped cautery, and leave the cautery open for some time, and then treat internally to heal.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	On the cauterization of the armpit near the removal of them (the growths or tumors).
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you cut out growths in the armpit, then you apply a cautery that resembles a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	And insert that burning piece into the severed artery, and hold your hand firmly so that the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood comes.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do this once or twice, for if they are too numerous, then cauterize each of them as we have described, and then treat them with ointments until they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery on any area, it is more harmful to healing.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XXXVI.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	On the cautery of fistulas that are naturally harmful in those areas.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the treatment that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by it, they should be treated with cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when someone has a fistula that is naturally harmful and is old, causing discharge and corrupted humidity, what is most appropriate to do is to probe it with a fine needle, and then determine the depth of it with the previously mentioned needle.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	And ignite the cautery which resembles a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	Then place the ignited cautery into this fistula, and according to the extent to which you insert the probe.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeat the application of the cautery inside until those corrupted parts are burned thoroughly once or twice or three times, according to the extent of your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And be careful not to burn the nerves and veins; or if the fistula leads to the body of the bladder or to the intestines, then be cautious of all those areas; and do not perform this unless the fistula is in a fleshy area and you believe it is not penetrating further.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Then treat the area inside until it heals.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the area is sealed, and the materials are separated from it, and remain this way for a long time, then you know that it is entirely cured.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the materials are not removed from it, then you know that it is penetrating or into the pulp of the corrupted bone, or this comes from those causes which will lead to recurrence in its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Capitol .xxxvii.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	Of the cauterization of the hemorrhoids.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When pain in the hemorrhoids is caused by cold or excessive wind (swelling), and for this reason, the patient's life is troubled, then it is necessary to cauterize those areas on the hemorrhoids with a cautery, applying a nail-shaped cautery specifically to each hemorrhoid.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And strongly cauterize them with a slight separation, so that three linear cauteries will be made, and thus they will be more effective in healing.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On the cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When weakness and softening occur in the bladder due to cold and moisture, causing the patient not to retain urine, then cauterize that area slightly above the bladder, where the pubic hair begins. Cauterize with one cautery on the right side and another on the left side of it.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the number of grains of the pouce (thumb); and cauterize that area with a cautery on the lower part of the back, or with two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And let the cautery be like a claw according to how it is processed. 
Capitol .xxxix.	Capitol .xxxix.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Of the cauterization of the thigh. 
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When cold and humidity come into the uterus, and because of this conception is prohibited, and the menstruation of the patient is corrupted, and the provocation (of menstruation) is delayed, and pain occurs with the occurrence of their periods, then it must be that the area is cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said in the cauterization for the bladder; and with a cautery on the spot below the pubis, or with two cauteries, and let the cautery be a chisel-shaped one.
Capitol .xl.	It seems like you've provided a section heading that appears to be ".xl." which in Roman numerals stands for 40. Without additional context or text following this header, it's challenging to provide further details or a translation. If you have more content from this section or need assistance with understanding what might typically follow such a heading in the context of a document or book, please feel free to share that information!
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	This line translates to:
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moist and phlegmatic humors are poured into the area of the ankle, and they cause swelling in their location, and a sign of this is that one thigh appears elongated when compared to the other.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the location of the dislocation is found where it hurts.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then it is necessary to cauterize the patient on the area of their ankle with a circular cautery, since you will have marked with your finger around the affected area in such a way that the affected part falls exactly in the center of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And let the cautery with which you previously outlined the form be used for the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize it with three large olive oil cauters.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And let the cautery be performed according to the extent of the inflammation of the entire chain; then care for it until it heals.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XLII.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	Of the cautery of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain comes to the upper part of the body and is caused by cold and moisture, the patient is treated as we have said and not otherwise, and this is outdated. Now you must purge the patient of thick humors with foul pills or artificial pills or similar ones; then cauterize that area.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the method of cautery in this case is according to two methods: either cautery with burning medicines, or cautery with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	And it follows two known methods, one of which is to cauterize that area on the broad part with three triangular cauteries according to this form; and make with those a good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And the space between each cautery should be equal to the thickness of a finger, and the cautery can be olive-shaped or round.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	And sometimes the cautery should be placed on the middle point, at the head of the ankle, thus using four cauteries.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, cauterize with a circle, which precedes the form in the cautery of the dislocation of the ankle, such that the circle contains and burns the entirety of the tendon.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the method of cautery for gout when the pain is attached to the ankle and does not extend into the thigh.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	And if it extends into the thigh, then cauterize that area with two cauteries on the thigh at the spot where you ask the patient where the pain is; and with one cautery on the calf, about four fingers away from the outer part.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cautery is knife-shaped, and the depth of the cautery should be according to the degree of protrusion of the chain [likely referring to a surgical term or anatomical structure].
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the patient indicates that the pain is spread around the area near the toes of the feet, then cauterize where you find it necessary with a cautery using three points or four or more as needed from there.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the patient indicates that the pain extends from the ankle to the thigh, then cauterize that area using a knife-shaped cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And be careful during any cautery that you do not use the cautery so excessively as to burn nerves or major arteries, and by doing so cause harm or contraction to the patient.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have seen some who cautery near the ankle and overdo the cautery, causing the heat to swell inside until the swelling reaches the foot, and the heat penetrates and corrupts the entire foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	Then apply a strong solution for the intestines, and through this, promote healing. 
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts at once, cauterize each according to this method.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise ones also spoke about the cauterization with this kind of cautery, which is made in the following manner: make a circle of iron whose circumference is half a palm; and let its hole be according to the thickness of a date seed or a little less.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And within that circle, there should be another third; and the space between them should be equal to the thickness of a hen's eggshell; and those circles should be opened from two sides; and the length of those rods should be one or two fingers, and make on those iron edges properly arranged in the circles; and this is its form:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Then it should be heated in the fire until it turns red and gives off sparks, and then it should be placed on the affected part of the ankle, with the patient lying on their side.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And then cauterize that area with three round cauteries at once.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then leave it for three days; then apply a plaster to that area and keep the wound open for several days; and then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	And of the good cauteries for him who has suffered, and finds with that the spot on him.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	And with a cautery and adhesive medicines, you should make two circles having an armhole perforation in which they place the hinge of an iron door; let the length of the walls be in such a way that their nature is about two nuts or similar sizes.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space which is between each quantity of the thickness of a finger; and they are opened below and above, and they contain themselves in this manner:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And then place your hand over the joint of the knee while the patient lies on their side, and press your hand firmly on the joint; and then take warm water and pour it between two circles, and let the heat be gentle at first and increase gradually, and keep this up for about an hour, and allow the patient to endure both the burning sensation and the adjustment — because that treatment causes a burning like fire — until the burning stops.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then lift your hand with the instrument and clean the warm water from the entire knee with cool water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then let it rest for three days and place something over the area until the blackness from the burning is gone, and continue this for several more days, and pus will flow out of it; this is the final stage of healing.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain spreads to the thigh or the abdomen, apply the same treatment as was done for the knee, using a container with water accordingly.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the method of hot water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the refinement of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Take an equal amount of alkali and unextinguished lime (quicklime), mix them together, and place the mixture in a new pot, one part of which should have a small hole perforated according to the quantity that can enter through it. 
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And place the bottom of the ulcer or inflamed area over an alkaline substance and pour warm water that reaches up to one finger over it, and then compress those areas with your hand for good compression, and let the sharp water descend from it into the part of the ulcer that is inflamed.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	Then collect all that water and pour it over another fresh alkaline substance and another new alkali, because at this time it will have strong sharpness, which is administered in many medical operations and in the cauterization of other limbs, as this operation involves fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And among the medicines with which a wide area is cauterized are substances like sesame oil and honey mixed with soap in such a way that they are combined.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Gaulus recounts an operation and cure performed by an ancient practitioner to treat pain in the ankle and sciatic vein, and he greatly praises this method, saying that no other treatment is necessary, and that it cures completely as he recommends, for after immersing that joint in a bath, one is already free from that ailment.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it is that chicory should be taken, and if chicory is not found, a fresh fig should be taken; and this should be crushed with a little grease and placed on the ankle where there is pain, or on the thigh, or on the hip, and it should be bandaged.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And it should be left for a period of three hours or for the duration that the patient feels relief from the discomfort.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	Then place that [remedy] in water and when the body is warmed, apply it to the sore area, for the pain will cease and healing will occur.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that it is not necessary for anyone to use cautery with these medicines except near the evacuation of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	But Escorides says that when the vein is cauterized with a goat's horn, it greatly benefits the patient; and the cautery should be applied in the following manner: take wool and soak it in old oil, then place it between the toes of the foot and on the sole.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	Then take dried goat's horn and ignite it until it turns to charcoal; then place it on the wool and burn it until it is spread out.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And then repeat this, and do not stop doing this until the sensation of the bite reaches up to the ankle and the pain subsides.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this method of cautery is called cow cautery.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	On the cautery of tooth pain.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Sometimes tooth pain is caused by various reasons, such as decay or impact or excessive evacuation, and by causes similar to these, due to the infusion of cold and moist matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cautery should only be applied in this specific case which is caused by the infusion of cold matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, it is necessary to first evacuate the patient with fitting pills and similar ones, then apply three lines according to the width of the tooth where the pain is, and mark them with a tenths of an inch between each line, making five cauteries or more, depending on the tolerance of the patient and their strength.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And let cauterization be done with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, cauterize with three cauteries or with four using a medial claw-shaped cautery in the following manner:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XLIII.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On cauterization at the beginning of jaundice.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Small yellow spots often appear with this disease in small children; and the sign of its beginning in children is that it affects their structure, causing elevation and movement in the eyes.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And you will find that the lower vertebrae of the back and spine begin to protrude above the other vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And therefore, when you see this and wish to prevent it, then cauterize that area with a circular cautery in the following manner:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	that you place the cautery over the entire part of the vertebra equally.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you wish, cauterize around the circumference of the vertebra with a pointed cautery in two lines or three.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And let the points be placed close together.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	Then treat the area in between to heal it with what we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	Be careful not to apply the cautery to swelling that has been caused by nerve spasms.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On the cautery treatment for gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that penetrate each part of the body, and when pain occurs in the feet, doctors customarily call this condition gout properly.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And thus, when gout caused by cold is treated with this method of cure and the pains are not alleviated, then resort to cautery.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And it is when you apply cautery near the evacuation in the area around the joint of the foot using multiple cauteries.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let the cautery be an olive-shaped one, which has the following form:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pain rises into the joints or to other junctions, and this often occurs, then apply cautery over each joint with three or four burns from all sides using this olive-shaped cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if more cauteries than these are necessary for you, then apply the cautery without pressing your hand too hard with it first, just around the size of a chain link.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pain rises into the joint and beyond, then apply the cautery that we have described in its chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pain is only in the hands and is called sweat (suagra), then puncture around the fingers as they curve, piercing along those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pain remains in the toes, then puncture around each toe and along the palm edge of the foot.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pains approach after some days in the joints or muscles, then cauterize them all over with the help of instruments.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not evacuate the patient without proper regulation and reception of medicines, for if good regulation is done and phlegm is evacuated with this cautery, he will be healed, God helps.
Capitol .xlv.	Capitol .xlv.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	Of the cauterization of ruptures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When a rupture occurs in the groin and the intestines appear before the hernia at the genital area, and this begins to happen soon, then you must order the patient to leave their food for the day and use laxatives so that the tear descends from their abdomen.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	Then follow the patient with your hands on their back, and command them to keep their body straight until the hernia or the intestines appear.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	Then return and, with your tied hands, test the rupture over the pubic bone, using a tool whose end resembles half a circle to examine the divided parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then heat the cautery, which has the following form:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	until it is red hot and gives off sparks.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then return the intestine or hernia to its proper cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from protruding again.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	And you have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion underneath them, another servant on their chest, and another on their feet, who holds their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And then place the cautery over that mark with your hand, holding the cautery upright, and insert it until you reach the bone of the heel within the middle of the swelling; and repeat with that another time if in the first attempt you have not succeeded in reaching the bone.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And carefully observe the condition of the intestine during your cautery, so that you do not burn the intestine, causing death or another serious harm to the patient.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your operation is not successful.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And it is necessary that the cautery for children be subtle according to their size and proportion.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And then care for the cautery site for three days with poultices until the burn scar is healed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that area with other ointments until it is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient should lie on their back for forty days until the site and the wound are fully healed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And it is necessary to restrict the patient's nutrition according to the length of their treatment time, which reduces their stomach capacity, and ensures that the intestine does not come out due to the effort of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And then when it is time to lift [the patient or treatment] after about forty days, administer a properly prepared medicine, and keep using it for another forty days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And let it be reduced in labor and excessive consumption of food and drink, and loud voices, for when one follows this regimen of complete healing, they will be healed.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And I will speak of the treatment for ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and at the beginning, if they do not want to heal, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size, and let what is protruding from the hernia be reduced as much as one-third of it; then treat it as we have said, without tightening.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And some of the earlier practitioners said that a rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery in this form, since it is marked out with a template.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And it is placed with a line that you draw across the widest part of the rupture, and another line above it; then place your hand with a claw cautery, but the first cautery should be lighter and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Capitol .xlvi.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Of the cautery of sprains.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain occurs in the upper limbs due to a blow or percussion and that pain persists for a long time and does not respond to treatment with medicines, then you must cauterize using a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And the cautery should be applied to the entire limb according to its size and smallness, and its strength and weakness, and the location of the twist and pain in it.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Therefore, if it is healed by the first cautery, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery on it; for it is customary with such pains to puncture the limb close to the affected area, so you must continue using the cautery until the patient is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	On the cautery of leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Some lepers see great benefit from being treated with cautery, especially if the type of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of blood and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And when you want to cauterize the affected area, consider if the leprosy is common and can be cured with what we have said in the division and does not spread further, and you fear that the corruption might encompass the entire body and all its composition, then cauterize on the head with five cauteries: one at the middle of the head, the second slightly below it towards the forehead at the end of the hair; two on both temples; and one behind, on the nape or neck.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And place your hand with the cautery slightly inside so that it presses on the bone a little, causing small indentations, and from there the scales are displaced, so that the expiration of thick vapors is alleviated; and cauterize on the shoulder as needed.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if leprosy has already spread over the patient and appears manifestly, then you must cauterize those areas with the cauteries which we have mentioned at the beginning; and with a cautery on the tip of the nose, and with two cauteries on both cheeks, and with two cauteries on two vertebrae of the neck, and with six cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and with one large cautery on the vertebrae near the hip, and one on the hip itself, and with two on the knees, and one on each knee, and with two on the elbows and one on each elbow joint, and with two on the buttocks, and with two on the muscles, and with two on the tendons of his foot; and cauterize those areas over all the joints of his fingers and toes, and on each heel of his feet, and on the soles of his hands.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And be careful of the nerves that are on the heel so as not to burn those.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And at times it is cauterized with a cautery on the bone of the penis and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the spleen.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more you adjust the cauteries, the more beneficial and appropriate it is; and know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery, just as they do with others, because their body is already numbed.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And it is necessary that the cauteries be large or few according to the limbs and joints, depending on the specifications of the tools.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then treat the cautery with crushed ear flour mixed with honey and with the other cure until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On the Cauterization of Stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When any limb is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, but is not healed, then you should cauterize that numbed limb with cauteries according to the size of the limb or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let your cautery enter slightly into the opening of the wound.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that by applying an ointment so that it may be healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And sometimes a cautery is applied to a numbness that affects the hands and feet, and the vertebrae of the back, to reduce the flow of nerves which cause that limb's malfunction, and the numbness is thus alleviated.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	But do not presume on this unless one is knowledgeable in the anatomy of the limbs and the distribution of nerves that move throughout the body.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLIX.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On the cautery of moles that are malignant.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When a mole is old and does not respond to any of the ointments of medicine, then you should apply cautery to it with a sharp instrument for a short time according to the size of the spot, so that the whiteness and color of it are reduced, and its color is changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with flour of ashes and lentils mixed with rose oil and leaves of arnica, and with the blood of a dove or the blood of a partridge, each in equal parts and all mixed together. Then soak a cloth in this mixture and place it on the area until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	The text provided seems to be in an archaic form of a Romance language, blending elements from Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. However, the phrase "Capitol .l." appears to be a heading or section marker rather than a complete sentence. It likely means "Chapter 1" but does not convey any medical content for translation.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	From the cauterization of the neck.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer begins and you wish to remove it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery around it just as it appears.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise say that it should be cauterized with the latter cautery in the middle of the area; but I have not seen this, for I fear that it may become ulcerated, and I have indeed seen this happen several times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is better that it be cauterized around it with a circle as we have said, or with multiple cauteries.
Capitol .li.	Chapter II.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	On the cauterization of abscesses.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When an abscess is delayed in maturation, and this is due to an excess of matter or the condition of the patient, who may be old and frail, with little blood, or because of the season, and you wish to hasten its maturation; then cauterize around it with small pointed cauteries; and afterward leave it so that it will hasten in maturing.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	And if you wish to make the perforation with a cautery, then heat the cautery which has this form: and apply it at the most suitable location within so that the cautery penetrates.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery in that most suitable location is left there, so that the arm's body be relieved; and then care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter II.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	On the cautery of corrosives.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrosive is a wandering corruption in the limb, which corrupts it as a fire consumes dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you find the corrosive in a place that can withstand cautery with fire, then heat several small and large cautery nails as appropriate for the location where the corrosion is.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then cauterize it thoroughly until you eradicate all the corrosion and leave no cause of it remaining.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And then leave it for three days, and place over the cauterized areas a cloth soaked with oil mixed until all the scars are eradicated and all the corruption is gone.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And then treat that with flesh-generating ointments.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	And if after three days the flesh does not grow healthy and there is no corruption, that is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on the areas that are rotten and corrupted.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And corrosive treatment is sometimes applied with sharp medicine, for that serves as an alternative to cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, cautery with fire is a more reliable method.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already mentioned the treatment with sharp medicine in the section, so use that when you need it.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter LIII.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On the cautery of claws and other similar parts.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Often observed in the affected areas of the foot is a condition called claw, which is a significant, embedded issue that distorts the foot. Cauterization for these conditions can be performed in two ways: cautery with fire and cautery with hot water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then place that heated instrument on the shoulder, and then move your hand with the cautery around the shoulder until the cautery reaches the depth of the shoulder.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And leave that for three days until it begins to sweat out through the arm. 
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And then apply a plaster made with crushed wild mallows mixed with salt, and leave the plaster on that area for one night, because it will root out its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with an ointment made from generative flesh until it heals. 
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it does not convert and often occurs on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, then you must administer this cautery with water. You should take a quill made of horn or iron or bone, and place it over the claw; then pour a small amount of warm water into the quill, and hold your hand; you will revolve that by compressing your entire hand, pressing the edge of the quill to the tip of the claw. The warm water will find its way through the pores at the tip of the claw; let the patient endure the sting of the warm water for an hour, and then remove it, as the claw along with its nails will be eradicated.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And in this way, with those placed one next to the other until they cover all of their body parts within the body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And then treat those abscesses where the roots of the claws are removed with these ointments which cause flesh to regenerate.
Capitol .liiii.	Capitol .liii.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Of the cautery of trembling.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When there is a tremor due to cold in the nerves or from a cold fever, or for another similar cause, then you must cauterize that with four or five cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra with one cautery; and with a cautery on their feet, and over their stomach with an olive-sized cautery.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the tremor of the patient is calmed and hastens the health from the cold disease.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 5.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	On the cautery of white lesions on the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When white spots appear on the body, and there are fissured pustules which are formed from thick corrupted matter; therefore, at the beginning when they appear, it must be cauterized over every head of the fistula with a fine cautery using myrtle twigs, the end of which is spread out by fire; or with long ashes of eggshell; or with a lens-shaped cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And sometimes the cautery is also applied at the beginning of its expulsion in this manner; and they are not believed to be harmful, and the excess is disrupted by doing this, and it heals from these actions.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	But however it must be done before evacuation with phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Capitol lvi.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Of cautery for accidental bleeding from an artery cut.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore, when this happens to someone, then you should press with your hand on the opening of the artery, and place your finger tightly over it repeatedly until the flow of blood has stopped, and that it does not come out.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then place in the fire the small and large olive-shaped cauteries in great numbers, and blow on them until they become very hot.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take one small or large piece according to the location and wound where the artery is broken, over that vein quickly place your finger after you have cleaned it, and hold the cautery so that the blood is constricted and stopped. 
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you remove your finger and extract the cautery, then take another cautery properly prepared among those which are ready in the fire, and thus do not cease to do this one after another until the bleeding is stopped.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And be careful not to burn the nerves that are here, and that no other harm comes to the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to stop the bleeding in any other way except by one of four methods: either by cautery as we have said, or by extraction when it has not been extracted, because when it is extracted, the ends are burned and the bleeding stops, or by binding with a bandage or by strong constriction, or by placing medicines on it whose property is to stop the blood; and they should be bound tightly with a poultice with appropriate compression.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	And he who administers appropriate compression with bandages and constriction using cloths or by placing burning and similar causes, should not apply it too quickly.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	But if this befalls someone and the doctor is not present nor medicine, then open with careful pressure of the index finger over the orifice of that vein as we have said, and apply a great constraint to it so that the blood may stop at the most critical part of the wound, and on the artery the finger should not be removed; and above the artery sprinkle with cold water of great chill until the blood is congealed and thickened; and more importantly consider where cauterization or medicine will be necessary.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begin the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	On incision and perforation and bloodletting and phlebotomy and wounds and their similarities.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter about every illness in which cautery with fire is appropriate and with combusting medicine, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for them along with the forms of the cauterizations; and I have ordered the chapters from the highest part of the head down to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And I will proceed in this chapter in the same manner, so that the one seeking relief from this may find it, now concerning what has been requested.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before I begin this, son, it is necessary that you understand that in this chapter there is the same terror as what is in the first chapter about cauterization. 
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And for this reason great caution must be taken, because during the operations in this chapter many times there can be evacuation which involves blood with which life depends, such as the puncturing of a vein or cutting into an abscess or opening for extraction or purging of the wound or extracting an arrow or incision of stone and similar procedures.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And with all of these is accompanied fear and trembling, and in the majority of cases, death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you that this should not happen to you in which there is hesitation, because sometimes it leads you from the ways of men into the ways of many diseases.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And among them are some who wander with their illness and are fleeting from death because of the intensity of what they find in their sickness, and due to the length of their illness, there is fear which signifies death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And among them is the one who gives you their possessions and says, "You will bring health to me," while their illness is perilous.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And thus you should not consent to anyone who comes to you in this manner; and your caution should be greater than your covetousness and rapacity; and do not assume any reason for this without certain knowledge that confirms what you must do, and which leads to a praiseworthy outcome.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And used in the cure of all your illnesses for prognosis and indication to which health is restored, because in that you find assistance in acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	O, sons, God inspire in you His understanding and does not take away your direction and protection, for this is in His hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have ordered this chapter distinguishing by sections according to what was preceded in the chapter on cautery, of the treatment from head to foot, so that it may be eased for you what you seek from this and of which you have need.
Capitol primier.	Capitol primier.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Of the treatment of water that is contained in the heads of children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this disease often occurs during childbirth and when the wet nurse binds the child's head too tightly.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And sometimes it occurs due to hidden causes that are not known.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	But I have only seen this disease in children; and for all those whom I saw, death was the outcome, and thus it appears to me as a fatal condition in them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and the head of the child was always so enlarged that he could not support himself due to the size of his head, and the humidity increased until it led to death.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this humidity is either added between the skin and the bone, or it accumulates over the bone on the skull.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	For the operation in such cases where the humidity is between the skin and the bone and the swelling is small, then you must make an incision at the center of the head with a cut横向的长度约为两指甲宽，以便液体流出。这种操作被称为spatum。
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And therefore, if the humidity is increased even more and the abscess becomes larger, then here are two incisions according to this method:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the humidity is left in the bone, a sign of it is that you see the corners of the head open from all sides and the water is squeezed out when you press that area with your hand on the inner parts and this was not hidden from you. 
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	You must split in the middle of the head with three incisions according to this manner:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And then extract all the moisture through the incision; and then tighten the incisions with bandages and poultices; and then anoint it with wine and oil for five days, and then remove the dressing and treat the wound with lint and ointments, and bind the head evenly; and feed the patient with dry food of little moisture until the member is strengthened and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another method of incision, where you should consider the size of the abscess and the collection of fluid, because sometimes it is more prominent in the occipital area, or in the front part, or on the right side, or on the left side; and thus pay attention with the incision to where the abscess and the accumulation of fluid appear, and do this according to what is best possible for you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not cut the artery and cause bleeding, for the patient may die from that flow of blood due to the evacuation of moisture.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter II.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	From the incision of the arteries that are near the ears, called hilasseysse.
Capitol segon.	Chapter second.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When such catarrhs or rheums occur in the eyes or feet, and this is an old condition, and you do not find the cure in medicines for it, then the last remedy in this case is to start from those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And therefore when you want to incise those where the patient shaves their head, and then rub the area with a rough cloth so that the veins appear, and then tightly bind the neck of the patient with some cloth; and then consider where the vein pulses; and the places of each over the locations which are pressed near the ears, and thus they are hidden in some men.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then mark over the artery with a probe, and then cut each one with a sharp spatula, making an incision reaching into the bone, and this is done according to the width of the head. 
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you want, insert the spatula below the artery and cut it at its branching points above.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And the length of the incision should be about two fingers together, because when any vein is cut, blood comes out with a pulsating flow, which shoots out frequently.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	And if the artery does not appear at the incision site, then you must measure from the earlobe a distance of three fingers' width, and then mark it with a probe, and proceed to enter into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And the amount of blood that must be let is an uncial of wine, and do not let more or less from it, and all of this depends on the quantity of strength the patient has and the fullness of their artery.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then examine the wound, and if any cause of infection remains on the bone, you should remove it to prevent an abscess from forming.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen the wound with poultices and linen bandages, and then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	On the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When an individual suffers from chronic migraines or sharp headaches due to moist and cold conditions in the sinuses of the temples, or if they are severe and similar to those, and treatment with medical methods does not provide relief, then we resort to extracting arteries from the temples or cauterizing them as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the method of the operation and extraction is that the patient should shave the hairs which are on the temples; and understand the artery visible in the temple where it is shown to you by its pulse, and it is hidden only in few men due to intensity of cold.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden from you, then the neck of the patient should be stretched with some cloth; and then rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with warm water until the artery becomes clearly visible to you.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And now you take the spatula, which has the following shape:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you carefully scrape the vein until you reach the artery; and then insert and extract it at the superior points until you remove it from the vein and expose it from the tunics that cover it on all sides.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the artery is thin, then wrap it with the tip of a needle, and then divide it at one point according to the extent to which its ends are elongated and contracted, and there will be no flow of blood, because if they are not divided, the blood will not flow out completely.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then evacuate one to three ounces of blood.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, then you must tie it in two places with strong double-threaded silk or cords tightly, and do not worry about putrefaction before the wound heals and the blood flow stops.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then cut away the excess that is between two ligaments; and do this at that time or another appropriate time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize that area with a cautery between the bones using a knife-shaped cautery before cutting off the extremities of it, and it will remain in place for the same procedure.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better to perform the work when the patient does not have a fever or is of a hot temperament; for cautery is one of those causes that aids in drying out excess moisture, and therefore is better in treatment.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And after the extraction of the arteries, fill the area with an old piece of cloth, and place it over the wound appropriately made, then treat it with dry medicines that promote flesh growth until it is healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while you are working another flow of blood comes from the artery, then you must act to stop that bleeding, either by using a cautery or by filling the area with cloth, and hold your hand until the bleeding is stopped.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if none of those causes are present to you, then place your finger on the spot where the blood is congealed, and splash the area with water of strong coldness until the sharp pain subsides, and be firm according to what is needed.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And what is lighter in the extraction of an artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two blades, since you have marked the two spots with a probe, and then place them, light the fire, until they reach the bone and divide the vein into two places, so that what is between the ends of it is extended, for they are not fully consolidated by this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And let the sharpness of the two blades be exemplary.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, if less sharpness than two blades is better, because if they are as sharp as two blades close to each part, and you do not cut the flesh too quickly. 
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, since there is some swelling in those areas, heat from fire is applied to them and the flesh is cut lightly.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better than all other works and lighter.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And let the space which is between two knives be the thickness of a finger.
Capitol quart.	Chapter four.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	On the treatment of acute and acidic tears in the eyes.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When those tears are acidic, and the source of these veins which are on top of the head protrude, and you do not find any cause for medical treatment in this, and sometimes the face of the patient reddens and they feel a crawling sensation in their forehead as if ants were crawling, and their eyes become weakened to such an extent that the hair around them is noticeable, and the eyelids are irritated by the acidity of the tears, ancient bitter remedies were used in treating those with this condition, and they called this treatment spassa.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And you command the patient to shave the hair that is on their forehead, and then make three incisions equally spaced according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the incision is about two fingers: the first incision should be equally distant from the length of the nose at the middle of the forehead, the second according to the length a little beyond the movement of the tear ducts which are in the lacrimal area, and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And be careful of the beginning of the arteries which are on two sides, and stretch your hand along the continuation of both jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space between each incision is the quantity of three fingers put together.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a piece of sponge prepared or dry cloths with which you dry the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then insert the spatula with two sharp ends, of which this is the shape of the incision:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	The text appears to be in an archaic form of a Romance language that shares features with Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Here is my attempt at translating the provided line:
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then stretch this spatula and insert it into the first incision again with another instrument which is called a cutter, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And place the sharp side of that to separate the attached flesh from the tendon, and the other side against the bone, and push it inside until you reach the middle fissure, and with that cut all the vessels descending from the head to the heels.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	And continue the incision to this part of the tendon, and then do this in the middle fissure between another fissure.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And when an equal amount of blood flows out, squeeze the areas where clotted blood is present.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then place in each fissure some old cat fur, and put over those powder mixed with wine and oil and vinegar, and ensure that it does not lead to a dangerous swelling.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day, remove the bandage and administer a large infusion of warm or tepid water, and then treat it with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil and other ingredients until the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	Capitol .v.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	For the given line:
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When acute and continuous purging occurs in someone, and the cheeks of the patient become thin from exhaustion, and their vision weakens, and their eyelids are ulcerated with hair loss, and there is sharp pain at the top of the head along with subsequent sneezing, then you should know by these symptoms that the materials and purgings do not come but from small veins originating from within.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure for this is as follows: command the patient to shave their forehead, then make an incision in that area at the center of the forehead, a small one in width (and begin the incision from the left temple towards the right temple; and the incision should be within the bone; extend your hand beyond the tender areas of the temples which are affected by chewing), until the bone is exposed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry all the blood with a sponge or a dry cloth, and then fill between the two edges of the incision with old wool or pieces of lint.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Then apply powdered material soaked in wine and oil on top to prevent an inflammatory swelling from forming.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you loosen that and see that the abscess has already diminished, then it is necessary to rub the bone where new flesh begins to grow, and then treat that with a drying regimen which causes the flesh to grow, just as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix them, and from those make a plaster and apply it to these areas for the growth of new flesh.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	For the given line:
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	Every cause that affects the ears is of four types: either it is mineral stone or something similar to stone, such as iron and glass, or it is from plants like sesame or bean, or it is caused by fluxes like water and sour wine and their likes, or some kind of animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And thus when a stone enters the ear or another similar cause from those that do not fit nor grow in the ear, and you expose the ear to sunlight, if you remove the stone, then distill some remedy like violet oil or sizami, and then administer its extract, and make them sneeze with condition, and plug the nostrils before the act of sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then place some pieces of cloth or wool around the ear's rim, and stretch the ear to the upper parts, because wet dust often accumulates due to these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it does not accumulate, then administer its extract using an instrument called the subtle episicyadic gesture, of which this is the form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is thoroughly removed with the gesture, that is good; and if not, then administer its extract using a subtle needle of double duplication.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And if it is not caused by this, then make a tube of iron and insert the end of the tube into the ear canal, and seal around the tube with wax and softened oil so that nothing is opened except the tube.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then extract with your breath with strong suction, for it helps greatly as we have recounted.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	But if it is not resolved in this manner, then take some alum or a similar substance with which birds are caught in small quantities, and place that on the end of the tube, and then wrap something around it properly placed.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert that into the ear canal easily, and then dry the ear of its moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And if it is not resolved by all the methods we have described, then you must consider incising that area before it turns into an abscess or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the method of incising that area is to first let blood from the patient’s temporal vein according to their strength, and then place that spot between your fingers. Turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the edge of the earlobe, squeezing out the pus from the deeply pressed area.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And if the crack of lunar shape reaches the stone, and once the stone is found, remove it if you can with appropriate instruments; then immediately close the crack quickly at that time, and care for it until it is healed.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause in the ear is one of the growths that have grown and become inflamed, then administer its treatment and extraction; but if it does not respond to this method, then take a thin, delicate spatula according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and use it to remove the growth that has occurred in the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not perform this when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, but place it in several small pieces, and then extract them with tweezers or delicate movements, or by incision as we have said, for the extraction is easier.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	However, when water has entered the ear, the patient should use a sternutatory at the beginning with caution, and fill their ear with some old cloth, then jump over the ear in which the water is present. If it is thus expelled, that is good; if not, take thin stone rods and levers according to the length of a finger, heat them slightly over fire, and have the patient insert one of these into the canal of their ear and jump on one foot from that side while striking the rod inside the ear with another stone.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Therefore, do not stop until all the water has been completely drained away.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And once the water has been completely drained, take a piece of paper or reed, and insert one end into the ear, and ignite the other end until the wax is burned off.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	Then insert another reed and do this as many times until all the water has been completely drained, and squeeze it with a tube as described above using the stone extractor.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	However, in the extraction of a small creature entering into that ear, if it is of small size and similar appearance, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is of large size and causes swelling in the eardrum, then administer its extraction with gestures and compressions, and the cause of this is less severe than all other causes that occur in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	However, in the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, when you treat it as we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillations and your treatment does not take effect, then you must examine the ear in the sunlight.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And therefore if any sign of worms appears here, then extract them by hand or with fine tweezers; but if no cause appears, then take a tube that is narrow at one end and wide at the other, which has this shape:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the thin extremity into the ear according to the amount that the patient can endure; and then suck through it strongly, and do this several times until all the worms are expelled.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	And if you do not obey the advice, then plug and seal the cannula's circuit with wax as we have said; then administer distillates that have already proven effective in the treatment of worms, and you will find this in the treatise on distillates.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let your effusion be with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear using this instrument, which has the following form:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make it of silver or bronze, leave it straight, with a small tube in which there is a flat surface on top.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And thus it should be designed to fit into the cavity of the tube that will be necessary for containment.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the rod and wrap the end of it with a small piece of cloth, then pour oil into the cavity of the ear, or the juice of some herb, or any of these medicines into the tube — which is in the ear — and then insert the rod with the cloth on top and press it gently with your hand until the oil is forced into the cavity of the ear and the patient feels the oil inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And that which is inserted into the ear should already be warmed with fire a little.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And be careful that the substance you will distill into the ear is not too cold, for medicines for the ear do not tolerate that.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the treatment of ear obstruction.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Sometimes, some children are born with unperforated ear drums from their mothers, and this can also happen in adults, where obstruction occurs in the ear canal due to plaque or flesh growth there. This obstruction sometimes happens in the area of the ear canal that does not conduct sound, and at other times it is on the outer parts.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which occurs in the area where sound is not conducted is often in the most difficult condition to heal.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in the case where sound is conducted, you should expose the patient's ear to the sun and observe it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And therefore if swelling is present, open it with a delicate knife of this form:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the extremity of it in which the width is small, one part being sharp and the other not; and the spatula be two-edged so that it does not harm the ear. 
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And therefore, if the obstruction is due to flesh grown in the ear or on it, then take that with subtle needles and cut it out very easily so that all the flesh may be removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if there is an obstruction in the ear canal, then take a fine thread of linen and warm it slightly over fire, and then insert it into the ear canal.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And thus, if you have found that the patient breathes with ease using this method, it means that due to the difficulty of breathing, the compression on them is alleviated easily; and be careful not to harm the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then place in the ear a piece of cloth as wide as the tube that you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or take some wax, melt it in warm water and sprinkle powdered crushed material over it and use it; and if you find the ear already inflamed, then you must remove the wax and replace it with another piece of wax that you wrap in grease made with rose oil, until the inflammation subsides; and then care for it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	But if a flow of blood occurs, then soak a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use another treatment that restrains the flow of blood, which is described in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Capitol .viii.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	For the treatment of athel (likely referring to some kind of swelling or ailment) which occurs in the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Attentively moisten those which reach the eyelids of the eyes sometimes with moisture, sometimes they are dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore, you must hold those with tweezers or with an ounce, and cut them with a knife from their roots, and then place your hand over the stitched areas.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	But if pain with a flow of blood occurs, then you cauterize those areas with a subtle lens-shaped cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is performed near the incisions and visible veins when there remains any cause of their return; and when they are cauterized with fire, those veins are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment for swelling that occurs in the eyelids of the eyes.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Visible particles appearing in the eyelids of the eyes, which resemble swelling in their strength and hardness, and thus the swelling is called by this name.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an accumulation of thick moisture on the eyelid below and above.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the procedure for it is to consider whether the swelling is occurring such that it appears from the eyelid and is rough on all sides; and the cause of it is light or minor.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore, make an incision over it along its width, and then scrape it off completely with ease until it dries out, and then suspend it with an ounce and remove it.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if you are not prepared at the start of the procedure and must penetrate the eyelid with an incision little by little, then this should cause no concern.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the wound is large, then you adjust it with stitches; and take care of what is inside so that it heals.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, you will not suffer harm from it, for the heat of it restores and reattaches that area.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the swelling is declining inside the eyelid and onto its inner surface, then elevate the eyelid and suspend the swelling with a sponge, or something that you can use from the start, and press on it from all sides; and if the eyelid has been extended by an incision, this should cause no concern.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	Then after the procedure, wash the wound with salt water; and treat the area in a way that promotes healing until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	On the treatment around the upper eyelid of the eye.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And so you often find them lying on their faces all the time, and they sleep with their faces down; and thus at the eyelids of their eyes, the eyebrows become wet, which have already been covered by swelling, and an appearance of cataract is evident in the eye; and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel the cataract inside them.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And here is the translation of the provided sentence into English:
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	And in the first instance, you must cut through the entire tendon until you reach the ankle, for in most dispositions, you should process the ankle by cutting according to the shape of white grease.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Therefore, extract it with cloths which you have wrapped around the said parts on the outside and pass between your right and left hand until it is dispersed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be careful not to insert it into the fissure so that with the spatula you do not reach the wound and aggravate it.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	If the artery does not appear at the beginning of the fissure, then you should place something small in the fissure to facilitate the process until the artery appears; and then extract it as we have said; and then apply linen cloths soaked in warm water and wine over the area and bind them with powder.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And also those who apply salt and place it in the depth of the fissure so that whatever remains of that moisture is removed.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it until it heals.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	And if an abscess occurs in that area, then treat it with cedar plasters until it heals.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	On methods of applying treatments to the stomach.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When natural and old hairs grow on the eyelids of the eyes, these cause problems to the eye and lead to various ailments such as persistent tears and softening of the eyelids and membranes, which can eventually lead to the destruction of the eye, a condition known as trachoma. This is cured in four ways: by cauterization with fire; by sharp medicine as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cauteries; by performing surgery through incision and suturing; or by using tubes, as I will explain.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And thus it is necessary that you hold the head of the patient in your hands; then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it turns, good; and if not, insert a needle into the one where there is thread from the pus part under the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate with thread above, and this should be — near the margin of the eyelid where the hairs grow — near the hairs, and pull the thread to the upper parts with the eyelid, and turn that with a reed.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then insert into the space inside the eyelid with the hairs adjusted using an instrument that leads from the larger lacrimal duct into the smaller one; and then extract the pus and place a small amount of lint or cloth powder on the eyelid, and then sew over the eyelid with thread, and thus it should be like the figure of a myrtle leaf.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, it is necessary that the figure be according to the amount of elevation of the eyelid, for this already varies among people, for some require a large incision in the eyelid depending on the extent to which the eyelid has sagged.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	Then place the spatula over the two lines you have marked, and begin from the larger tear duct towards the smaller one.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your incision is near the natural hairs, just as it is usually done for the king. 
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then place the needle in one of the two angles of the chain, and then scrape that entire area clean, and then sew together the two lips with a thread or fine woolen yarn, and wipe away the blood, and attach what is superfluous from the ointments over both eyebrows with some viscous causes if you wish to do so, and if not, do not worry about it.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And then remove the suture of the ointments within three or four days, and then care for it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, leave the wound without sutures, and care for it with substances that dry and constrict, for the eyelid being raised requires the sealing of the wound and the addition thereof; however, suturing is better. Therefore, this is what the ancients taught regarding treatment.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	However, one must be careful with the patient, and it is a good practice, and not out of fear.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another method in surgery, which involves shaping the eyelid like a myrtle leaf, and then elevate the eyelid with three separate needles arranged in this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	If it is not possible to do that, hold the hooks, and if this is not satisfactory, take a needle with thread and insert it into the middle of the figure, then place another thread close to the larger lacrimal duct, and the second thread near the smaller lacrimal duct, adjust between those threads equally, and then lift your hand evenly, lifting the entire chain over which you have marked as we have described.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then bring together the two lips of the wound with stitches, and treat the inside so that it may heal.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	And if an abscess occurs in your incision or your fracture, treat that abscess with ointment and the like, and with salves.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And sometimes you may encounter an eyelid where the hairs are inverted; then you should use what we have mentioned about incision there; however, in some cases, stitching is more skillful.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	To treat with reeds follows this method:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	and it is that you turn the eyelid inside out and split the structure within as I have described; then, by art, make two reeds or two thin splints whose length should be according to the length of the eyelid and their width should be a third of the width of the spatium.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already made incisions at the ends of each part where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then bring each one carefully over what is excessive on the eyelid of the eye, and constrain the reeds of each part with strong pressure, and leave it that way for several days, because the constriction will cause the excess to die off, dry up, and fall off by itself.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	And if it is delayed, then break through with the saw at the bones, and then treat the wound until it heals.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	When it is secured, the eyelid is lifted and the hairs do not prick.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the form of two canes which you shall make according to this design:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and there should be the quantity of the length and the width neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	On the removal of hard, irritating hairs from the eye using a needle.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When there are unnatural, hard, rough, and irritating hairs in the eyes, then the operation is that you take a fine needle and place it into some fine linen or flax, and then adjust the ends of it so that each one is held delicately between your fingers.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And the length of the threads should be equal to one palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then you apply another thin layer of ointment over it briefly, and bind the extremities of that if you so desire.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then place the patient's head on your lap, and bring them close to the sunlight so that your work may be clearly seen, for this is a delicate and精细的操作。 
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then insert the needle into the root of the hair precisely, which requires skill, and make it penetrate quickly into the eyelid before removing it from the natural hair.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull the hair inside upwards and insert that into the wound, and let there be one or two or three hairs, but no more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand with that inside so that the hair is removed along with the wound in the eyelid along with the natural hair. 
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	If the ailment is drawn out but the pus has not been evacuated, you should draw the illness to the parts of it with a salve that you have composed with that, so that the ailment is expelled from the wound above. 
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And view that with the sight of the wound, because when you will have cut into the sinew and the tendon, and let each one and the nails of the foot be cut, and leave the nails for two or three days, until the hair adheres to its place and new good flesh grows over it.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the hair is shorter, then you adjust a long hair from the natural hairs, and lift it with that, or leave it inside so that it is extended close to some space, and then you lift it.
Capitol .xiii.	Capitol .xiii.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	For the given sentence:
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When there is swelling in the eye and it is a contraction of the eyelid when it contracts inward or to the right or left side due to poor healing of wounds or burns or cautery, and this condition is called "leporina," and this hercrati [likely referring to a type of swelling] can be natural or accidental, and it is caused by poor healing of wounds or burns or cautery, or resembles similar ailments.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And it is not necessary for you to treat the causes that dry up and constrain him; for if you do so, it will produce even worse pus than ever before.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use in that of causes which mollify thus as fenugreek is, and foment with the water in which their ashes and seeds are steeped or unguent of aquilon, which is liquefied with some of the oils, and submerge therein the joint, and cure with that.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your cure is that you should pierce with all skill what has not been consolidated according to the form at the beginning. 
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation which we have spoken of is nothing but some correction of the hernia that does not return to its original form as it was before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	For the given line:
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This type of inflammation that occurs on the eyelid is properly called stye; and it can be either a natural occurrence or an accident.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	More accidental damage is caused by plagues or by cuts or by cautery or by similar things.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the method of the operation is that you take a needle with double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and make it pass from the left tear duct to the right tear duct, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then stretch the flesh at the points above with the needle and pierce it with the needle, and cut with a broad spatula.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And then return the shape of the eyelid as needed; if not, take the thread and place it in the cut shape, and with that, turn the eyelid, and create the two slits on the side of the eyelid accordingly.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And let the ends of the two slits be at the two angles of the incision that you have made where they meet, and form an angle with them such that when they come together, a figure is formed by them.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is the Greek letter: lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then remove the flesh in such quantity that it reaches the sharp edge of it, which is the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then align the separated parts and sew them together with wool thread; then treat them with what we have mentioned of the mollifying medicines and warm compresses until it heals.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if you need to make an incision due to a fissure or suture or cautery, then you must make a flat cut on the skin of the eyelid as described.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate with a warm compress between the two lips as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In summary, regarding the treatment of incisions that are above or below, as they occur in the operation, according to the form in which the incision is prepared, and that form varies in different ways.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the wise artisans always prepare their methods in every possible way so that they can return the figure to its natural form or close to it, and they adapt according to what is most suitable for the patient concerning the operation and the instruments in their best conditions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this consolidation happens to many people, it is often the upper eyelid that becomes stuck to the white of the eye, and it is prevented from moving easily or performing its natural functions; therefore, you must insert the tip of a reed under the eyelid, lift that up, or extend that with an instrument.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you incise the adhesion with a fine spatula, which should not have sharp edges for the incisions, keeping it slightly blunt so that the patient is not disturbed during the operation, and remove the spatula so that it does not puncture the skin with its sharp edge.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And let your incision carefully separate that adhesion so that the eyelid returns to its natural form and the entire adhesion is healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then you put salty water into the wound with which you wash it; or distill onion dissolved in water onto it.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate the eyelid from the wound with a splint, and place wool infused with egg white over the wound; on the third day, use consolidating treatments until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	On the incision of ingrown nails and flesh growths of the lacrimal area.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that an ingrown nail can occur in two ways: either it is nervous, resembling a hard and fine callus; or it is non-nervous, similar to frozen white moisture, which when touched with iron, can be taken out with tweezers without being forced, and the tweezers do not need to be inserted into it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both of these conditions do not begin until the larger tear duct is involved, whereby vision is gradually impaired and you should prevent light and eye movement.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	And the method of operating during incision is that the patient places their head in your lap, and then you open their eyes, lifting the eyelid with your hand, and then grasp the needle with minimal duplication and extend it towards the upper parts.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take a needle and insert into it a horsehair or ox hair or cow hair, or something similar, or use strong thread; or double the tip of the needle little by little and place that in the middle of the nail, and pierce that with the needle, and bind the nail with thread; and extend that to the parts above, and scrape with the hair the side of the nail which is the quick.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And in this way, you follow that with the hair inside the patient's anus.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then you incise the remaining part at the root of the tear duct with a fine spatula or small scissors, and clear the tissue around the natural tear duct so that continuous tearing does not result from the incision.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the nail is extended with just once threading or binding with thread, as we have said, and then it should be scraped with a spatula that looks like this:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And be careful not to touch the corneal layer with the spatula and cause a rupture, and that the quick is not pierced.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And when the incision is made, put a little salt or lint made of linen into the wound, and leave it there until the next day; then treat it with what is necessary until it heals. 
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the nail is not sensitive and you cannot insert the needle, nor can it be fixed in that part with an ounce, then this type of nail problem is treated with medicines, and it is healed thus as I say and described in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish to incise that area, then you open the wound of the patient and take a sharp, slender scalpel according to this form:
am subtilitat.	And if you wish to incise that area, then you open the wound of the patient and take a sharp, slender scalpel according to this form: with subtlety. 
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if you find that it is rarefied and confused and penetrates into that region, then distill from your juice into the head cloth made of linen or with a roasted head or with ground salt, and apply the cloth to the area until the next day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat the operation on that area removing all of what is his [body], but rather cauterize any opposing abscess in the wound, because when you leave that, treat the initial abscess until it heals.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat your operation on that area until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The prominence of the lacrimal flesh, if noted in the nose for great harm, should be suspended with an ounce; and incise that part from there, but do not complete the incision so that you do not cut into the tear ducts.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a warm distillation to the lacrimal area and continue doing so until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	On the incision of polyps and what is born from tight flesh in the nose.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Sometimes in the noses of some individuals, hard flesh grows and covers the pupil, or approaches and presses tightly against the eyelids, forcing them together from the outside and joining them like a barrier. 
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	Here is the translation of the provided source sentence:
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And let your incision be with the scalpel which you use to incise those areas or with the knife we have recommended in the section on the nail, or with small scissors with which basilicum is collected according to how it will come in the form near this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if any cause for watchfulness remains and the blood is excessively copious, and you fear an abscess might form, then leave the wound open and treat that abscess with what alleviates that abscess, and then repeat the procedure within until it is healed, and similarly deal with the flesh around which such a wound occurs in this manner.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	However, you must ensure that all healing of the wound is done either through natural means or by accident, using instruments, and do not put your hand into any of these procedures until you see that the member can sufficiently endure such an operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	On the collection of pus in the wound.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Pus comes from inflamed veins that are hardened over the wound and prevent proper healing, causing the wound to fester for a long time.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, at the beginning, it is necessary for you to consider whether the wound in which there is pus is strong and if there is no other illness besides the pus; then you should collect that pus.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And it is that you command the patient to rest their head on your lap, and then suspend those veins with an ounce or two according to your judgment; and let that ounce be of fine doubling in this manner:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	Or do two ounces gradually into a cup according to this method:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And then those veins should be tied off with fine threads, carefully, and you should wipe the blood little by little until you see those veins emptied of blood and turned pale.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And be careful that you do not lead the blood with the edges of the spatula; and let your operation be in the middle of the day when the sun is up, and be firm in your operation so as not to cut into anything but those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed this, then distilled vinegar or wine should be applied to the blood to corrode what remains of the coagulated blood with its acidity.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	But if it is not possible for you to complete this in that hour, then apply a plaster with something that alleviates the pain, and leave it for several days until the pain is subdued and to ensure there is no risk of an abscess forming.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then apply the same method to the second one until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form of the scissors:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On the reduction of nasal fractures.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat fractures with cauterization or sharp, burning medicine as previously described in the narration and it is not healed, then do not hesitate but make an incision over the abscess to allow its maturity, and extract all the moisture within it until the bone is uncovered.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then when the bone is uncovered and there is corruption or blackening in it, you should scrape it with an instrument that has the following form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is called the rough head, and it is made of Indian iron, and its head is round like a sieve that is made by puncturing with a file or finely perforated by subtle puncturing (as shown in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place it on the corrupted part of the bone, then rotate it between your fingers, and press your hand little by little until you know that the corruption has been scraped away.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And this should be done several times, and then restore the area with drying and constricting agents.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	And so, if the area is stabilized and good flesh has grown there and the wound has separated from the pus and remains like this for forty days, and it does not recur, and it does not become inflamed again, and no accident occurs in it, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, then the issue is not so much to generate but to reduce the fissure to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: you must expose the bone with an iron or with sharp medicine, and once the bone is exposed, then take a splint in the following form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The tip of the iron should be triangular, and the shaft should be gradually narrowed towards the tip in such a way.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	Then place that [iron] on the bone, near the lacrimal area; extend your hand a little from the nose, and then rotate your hand with the splint until it penetrates the entire bone. The patient will feel this as air tries to escape when you do this.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore, at this time restore the area with astringent and drying medicines as has been mentioned.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Therefore, as the flesh and the area become hardened, the material that was exuded to the outer parts returns inward, hence this is lighter on the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	On the reduction of the prominence of the eye.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the eye protrudes entirely and no damage or reduction occurs in the vision, then it is necessary to lax the patient, and then follow up with ventilating blisters on the temples after scarification and good bleeding; and then apply an ointment over the eye which is made of pitch, aloe, ensam (a type of gum), and sarcocolle (a type of resin); and finally strengthen the plaster over the eye with pulverized seeds.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the method of the powders is that you take mane hairs, and each hair should be folded into four parts; and make the powder from those hairs.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then place those one over the other according to the amount that the wound requires.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And then press on those with a hard cloth with strong binding; and repeat the cupping after bloodletting; and then remove the cups and leave the wound exposed day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if the binding becomes loose, then it must be tightened.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And then remove the bandage day and night as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the wound has already been reduced, that is good, and if not, then repeat the plaster with the powders and binding and cupping until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	On the treatment of swelling in the uveal tissue (of the eye).
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is disruption in the uveal tissue and it becomes prominent, protruding from the eyelids like a node of a raisin, and resembles human form due to this swelling, if you wish to incise it, the operation is as follows: you insert a needle into the base of the uvea from below upwards, and then place another needle with double thread on the side towards the lacrimal area, make that penetrate and leave the first needle in its position; then cut the area of the double thread and lift the part of the uvea around the needle's circuit, and press it firmly.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then remove the needle and place on the wound wool soaked in egg white, and leave until the thread falls with the grape.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then treat the wound with something that comforts it internally so that the plague may be healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And sometimes, it gathers from all sides with a circle of cloth around the swollen wound, and then pierce it with a subtle spatula to reach the core of the wound, allowing the whitish fluid to flow out, and lower the swelling immediately.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen it so that it may heal.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio de alconati.	On the treatment of dislocations.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This ailment, which is called dislocation, is nothing but a swelling that is fixed in the joint resembling descending water, but it is not that.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	The method of treating it is to have the patient sit on a prepared and straight chair, then take their head in both of your hands and move it until you see the swelling occur at the respective parts, then let it dry and not descend, and leave the light so that the patient sees the causes just as they did before.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not go down below, know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	And if the descent of the pus is not prepared as we have said, then make the patient sit between your hands and take a fine spatula and use it to separate the panniculus from the conjunctiva at the edge where the conjunctiva meets the corneal border (inside the eyelid), until the pus is drained out.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Once it is drained out, then you drip warm water into the nostril in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then it should be treated with other methods until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	On the treatment of water (fluid) descending from the nose.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already mentioned the types of fluid in the division and which ones are suitable to be pierced with a needle, according to the health condition.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Now you must make the patient sit between your hands on a chair and tie their nose tightly with a binding agent.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And then place your left hand near the eyelid of his eye if the eye that has the water is the left eye; or with your right hand, if the eye is the right one.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And then with your right hand take the almond, if the eye is the left one; or with your left hand, if the eye is the right one.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And then place the tip of the almond near the crown along the thickness of the ray in the white part of the eye near the smaller tear duct, and then press the almond with force and rotate your hand accordingly.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then penetrate into the white part of the eye and feel that the almond has already reached the desired location.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And it is necessary that the length of the path of the almond to the front be the same as the distance from the pupil to the end of the black part, which is the crown of the eye; for you will see the pupil through the clarity of the corneal layer with this method.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And then place the almond in the location where the water is, and then pull it down gradually little by little, and if the water descends quickly, you will see the patient recover their sight immediately, with the almond still in their eye.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then rest for a while; if the water has descended, then you should wait another period before any medication is administered.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And when it is cut and does not descend, then you should extract the medication easily, and rotate with that your hand little by little, and then dissolve in the water a small amount of clear salt from the gem and wash the hole inside with that; then place outside the hole a plug or stopper or wool infused in ointment and egg white and bind it with that to the hole.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	But we and those of our time place on that wound some crushed cloth mixed with egg white.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if your medication does not adhere to the instrument of the hole due to its hardness—because there are some people for whom the hole is very hard—then you must take the spatula named alberid, which has the following form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And then use that to pierce the joint, and do not linger your hand in the action, for the goal is only to create a fine place for the medication.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then insert the suppository as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you should complete your work by preparing the patient's dark room where they sleep on their back, and all movements are prohibited.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And pause to understand the nature of the liquid that cleanses their nature, and do not move their head to the right or left at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And let the dressing be according to its condition within the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then remove that person to a dark room and shield the sensitive sight, show them some causes, and then change the dressing within the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And it is not necessary to do this during the time of treatments or right before the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	However, it is necessary that you do this so that the water can gently pass through with great and strong observation.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	But if an abscess occurs, then you must remove the bandage before the seventh day and treat it with something that reduces the abscess.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Here is the translation of the provided line:
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And then it is gently laid down from that position and turned over onto its back. 
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in surgery it is not excused for the disciple to see certain times, and then you should be bold on the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And it has already come to us from some of those who are in the field of medicine, and some say that fire is made in a clay pot perforated with which water is sucked up.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	But nevertheless, I have not seen anyone in our land who has perfected this, nor have I read of it in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the spices of mandragora for which it is placed upon those who are ignorant of those:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they are made of wax or of proper iron, and the extremities of them should be with this triangular subtlety, the sharp end thus as that is the form.
Capitol .xxiv.	Capitol .xxiv.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	Of the treatment for flesh hanging from the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When diverse flesh growths appear on the nose, some of which are caused by a condition resembling a cluster of small worms or nasal polyps; and this disease is called polypus because it resembles those small worm-like structures.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And of it is cancerous flesh, which appears pale and of a dark color; and of it is lion's flesh, which is not of a dark color. 
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in those cases where the flesh is not fraudulent nor cancerous, you should make the patient sit between your hands and expose them to the sun, and clean their nostrils, and lightly prick that area of the skin with a needle.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then extract that part from the outside areas, and then divide what you have understood of those parts with a fine sharp spatula between until you know that all the flesh has been removed; so if any reason remains for which the amputation is possible, then cut it easily with one of the fine instruments until no reason remains for it to stay. 
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	And if the swelling is accompanied by blood or an abscess, then you apply what is needed; but if it is a malignant swelling, then you cut and cauterize that area where the bleeding has to be stopped and all the pus must be removed. 
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And then let it be poured into the nose near the incision with sweet wine or water.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	And if the nose is opened and you process humidity into the palate, then you know that it is already healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	And if the humidity does not penetrate as it should, then you know that inside there is flesh swollen with pus between the bones of the nose to which incision has not reached.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore, now it is necessary to insert a thread into which some thickness is added, and tie knots on the thread, placing between each knot a distance of one finger or thumb, and prepare the patient and insert one end of the thread into the nose using a probe or another suitable tool.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And after this has been done, draw the odorant inside so that it reaches the nasal passages, and sit on your heels, as children often do in schools when mimicking this action, and it is an easy method for those who wish to perform it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then hold the two ends of the thread, one end coming out of the nose and the other remaining inside the nose, and apply pressure to the flesh with the knots on the thread, doing this until you know that the flesh is secured by the knots of the thread.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then extract the bile, and place near the nose during bloodletting a sponge, and do this for three days or more until the ointment corrodes all that is rotten in the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And then at the end of the treatment, place a lead cannula in the nose for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	And if you decide to use a drying treatment, apply that method.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument used to administer nasal drops with which scents and medicines are distilled into the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And make this from silver or ceramic, which resembles a small open lamp, like a small bowl, and the mouth similarly.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you wish, make a closed tube like a reed, and the cannula of the instrument for administering nasal drops should be flat and open; with a handle at the back, with which you hold it when heating it in oil or the water that you want from the juices and medicinal causes.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these nasal purges are valuable: take beaver fat, white balsam, ginger, saffron costus, long pepper, sage, and thyme, one ounce each. Mix them with juice from lettuce and cyperus, and make pills. Dissolve one pill in warm water, and instill it into the patient’s nose while they are lying down.
Capitol .xxv.	Capitol .xxv.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	Given the instruction and the example translations provided, here is an attempt at translating the given sentence from this medieval-like language into English:
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Here is the translation of the given line:
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And for this reason, you must incise at the beginning of its appearance and remove all of it. 
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And then place over the area where the cautery or burning medicine is applied.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	And if the onset of its manifestation is delayed until it is greatly enlarged, then consider whether it has calcified, become hard, dark in color, and lacks sensation; at that time, do not touch it with an iron instrument as it is a chronic abscess; for many have perished by those who incised this kind of abscess due to the great danger to the person upon whom they operated.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the abscess is somewhat recent and not dark in color, and incision is possible at any time, then treat the patient and incise it without fear, and care for the area with substances that dry and constrict until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	On sewing the nose and lips and ear when continuity is disrupted by injury or similar causes.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when you encounter a disruption of continuity in one of these cartilages, there is little to be gained from the operation unless it is in certain cases.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when you encounter any cause of these wounds, you should consider if it is a fresh wound with its own blood, and then you should sew the two edges of the wound together with sutures, and then treat what is inside so that it may heal.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the edges of the wound that broke continuity are already separated and each one has healed, then you must pull each part of its apparent chain until blood comes out.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then bring together the two lips with sutures and tighten them, and over them sprinkle powdered dragon's blood and finely ground it, and place over the powder a piece of diafinition plaster, or some other type of consolidating plaster, and leave that bandage for two days or three, and then remove it and replace that plaster until the stitches fall off by themselves, and finally treat with ointment until it is healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	And the method of suturing is that you close the discontinuity using needles as we have recommended in the suturing of the abdomen, or you can close the discontinuity with stitches as you know how to do.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	On the extraction of those causes that occur within the two lips in the internal parts.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Often observed in some men within the internal parts of their lips are hard swellings resembling lard, and some of them are smaller while others are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, you must turn the lips and carefully cut each of those hard swellings from all sides, and then fill the space left by the removal with finely ground sage until the blood is constricted. Then wash the area with sweet wine and treat the site with a styptic agent until it is healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	Capitol .xxviii.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	From the incision of the flesh fitted into the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	There are many patches of flesh fitted onto the gum, which the ancients called alveoli. Then you must suspend that with a hook or hold that with forceps and incise it deeply to its root, and let the pus or blood flow out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	Then apply to the area some ground sage or other styptic or cicatrizant powders.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then incise it again and cauterize it, because after the cautery it will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	On the extraction of teeth with forceps.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth, both those inside and outside, and between the gums, there are rough tartar deposits, decay, and some patches that are blackened or yellowish-green, this leads to corruption in the gums and causes the teeth to decay.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And thus it is necessary that you seat the patient between your hands and place their head on your knee, and straighten the teeth in which you find those scabs and causes resembling sand so that no cause remains among them, and this is done for the blackness and yellowness and other conditions so that they may be cleansed.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Therefore, if what is at the beginning of the reasoning remains so; and if not, then you repeat the reasoning on those points on another day and the second and the third until it reaches the final statement that you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And know that teeth require various kinds of forceps and many shapes according to what is prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And therefore, the razor with which the tooth is cut from inside is different from the razor used to cut between the teeth in other forms, and these forms of razors you should prepare, which you will see shortly:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter .xxx.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Of tooth extraction.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	You must cure the tooth of its pain with all your skill and effort in the entire process of extraction, for there is no reason to replace it when it is extracted, for it is a sublime substance within that is discarded in the extraction.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	Sometimes when the patient insists on having that tooth extracted, you must firmly ensure which is the painful tooth, for often the pain deceives the patient and they think it is in a healthy tooth, and if you extract that one, the pain will not cease until the diseased and painful tooth is removed, for we have already seen this through barbers' operations.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, you must be certain which is the painful tooth, and once you know well, then you must score around the tooth with a spatula that has some efficacy, until it is separated from the gum all around, and then remove it with your fingers, or with fine scissors bit by bit until it comes out completely.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then use large forceps for good leverage or strong gripping, and hold the patient's head between your hands firmly so that it does not move, and then pull the tooth straight out in such a way that you do not break it, nor cause greater pain to the patient.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And therefore, if it is not removed easily, then take one of those instruments and place it underneath with ease and exert the removal in the same way as was done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	And if the tooth is loose or decayed, then you must wrap that area with cloth and tighten it with a fine thread at the end to ensure it does not break when you apply pressure on it with tweezers.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And you must carefully perform scarification around the entire gum area and be cautious with your strength so as not to tear it or leave any part of it broken, and return to the patient for further treatment to ensure that the evil is greater than the initial pain. 
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And beware that you do not do what some ignorant barbers do in their stubbornness and audacity regarding the removal of them; for they often bring great maladies upon men, which are more difficult to cure, and the roots of these remain unremoved entirely, or some of those, or extract it along with some bones of the jaw as we have witnessed many times.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And then for the extraction, wash the mouth with hot wine or sour wine with salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if there is bleeding because of this, and it happens frequently like monthly occurrences, then sprinkle some amount of sage over the wound, and if the sage does not help, apply a cautery.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The form of the forceps and delicate tongs with which a tooth is extracted at the beginning should be long on the outer end, short in handling, and thick, so that they do not bend when you use them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And they should be such that the thick handles are within so that when you grasp them, they do not bend, and their outer ends are short.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And they should be made of Indian iron, carefully crafted with straight ends, and at the ends of these, there should be teeth that fit into each other and grip tightly through constriction. Sometimes, the ends of these should have the shape of the beak of a bird called a ciconia, which is a stork, and they are of strong constriction.
Capitol .xxxi.	Capitol .xxxi.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	For the extraction of teeth and removal of broken bones from the jaws:
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need to extract a broken tooth that still has some root remaining, then it is necessary for you to place something soft over the area for one or two days until the site is softened; and then insert tweezers or forceps whose ends are shaped like the beak of a bird called stork or vulture, the form of the forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The limbs are to be treated within thusly as with a file or a rasp.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you do not obey this instruction with these forceps or tongs, then you must incise over the razor edge and peel away all the flesh and insert the tool called an atalis, which is a small lever of this shape:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And let there be a small thick extremity that is not inserted too deeply so that it is not broken.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Therefore, if by this the incision is well-placed, it's good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is triangular at the end, in which there should be some thickness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second instrument is that it should be triangular and have a finer tip.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And already it is aided with this instrument having two prongs, the form of which is as follows:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And with other instruments, which precede in the scraping of teeth; for it is also done with this instrument, which resembles a large onion, and this is its form:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	The twisted or shortened triangular tip, which should be of some thickness, and not too fragile so that it does not break.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And you should know that the instruments for moving teeth are also similar to the other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	But the skilled and subtle artisan in the art finds by himself according to what the operation and diverse illnesses indicate; for there are illnesses for which the ancients neither described nor provided specific instruments, due to their diverse forms and types.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the jawbone or other bones of the mouth are fractured, or if you can, then treat it by placing the bone back in its position using what is appropriate from the instruments and forceps that we have mentioned in the extraction of tooth roots, and assist with gestures which have the following form:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And if there is any small swelling, reduce it gradually, and hold or constrict it with your mouth so that it does not escape or flee until the bone is fully exposed; then restore the area with appropriate medications.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if there is a small puncture in the bone, then clean that area of the puncture and its blackness, and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	On the treatment of prominent teeth that stand out above the others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When prominent teeth do not follow their natural course due to their shape being lax, and especially when this occurs in women, particularly those who are highly revered; therefore, you must consider: if a tooth is close to another tooth, and it is not possible to extract or loosen it, then remove that one; but if it is not attached to another tooth, then cut it with this instrument of which this is the form; it resembles a pig's snout and should be made of Indian iron with an extremely sharp edge.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And your incision should be such that you cut it over several days due to the hardness of the tooth, and ensure that none of the other teeth are damaged.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if a tooth is prominently exposed to filing, then file it with an Indian iron file, which has the following form:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And let it all be of Indian iron and the edge finely sharpened; and let the points be made small like those on a file with which needles are made, with which the tooth should be filed little by little over several days with ease, so that no other tooth is damaged or harmed.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	Then bind it at the end, and shave it with sharp razors.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if a tooth is broken in such a way that it irritates the tongue, then you must file inside it so that the roughness of that fragment is removed and smoothed out, and fill it so that the tongue is not irritated and speech is not impaired.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On the restoration of damaged teeth with gold or silver filings.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When you encounter front teeth that have been displaced or loosened by impact or falling, and the patient cannot chew on what they eat, and you have treated it with styptic medicines but your treatment has not worked, then in order to prevent further damage, use gold filings to strengthen them rather than silver, because silver can corrode and will fall out after a few days, whereas gold never changes.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And let the gall be of such fineness and thickness that it can enter between the teeth; and the way to apply it is by taking the gall and taking double of it between two healthy teeth, and then increase it with two twists of the gall between two molars, or one or several, until the thread reaches the healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then repeat the incision within the area where you started, and hold your hand with ease and skill so that it is not clumsy.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And let your strap be with which you tighten the jaw so that the roots of the teeth do not come out.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then separate the excess bile from the extremities using forceps or tongs, and apply those in each place with care, and turn them and hide them between the healthy tooth and the diseased one, so that they do not cause injury to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then loosen that tightly as a rope.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	And if it is loose or broken, strengthen that or those with another thread in such a manner throughout its entirety.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the reaction of two healthy teeth and two diseased ones, just as you see these bound together:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when it is necessary to return one or two teeth to their proper places at the gum line, and they have grown back as we have described, and that they fit properly.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And this is done only by skilled artisans and wise [individuals].
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And sometimes a piece of cow bone is prepared and shaped like a tooth, and it is placed in the location where the tooth is missing, and it is secured as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	On the condition of the ligament that affects the tongue and prevents speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament that affects the tongue sometimes is natural, with which a person is born, or it is accidental and occurs due to an injury that has already healed.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation on it is to open the mouth of the patient, with their head positioned in your lap; lift their tongue, and then cut that nervous ligament according to the width within which the tongue is separated from its attachment.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	And if there is any hardness or knotting in that area, and this has occurred due to the consolidation of an injury, then you cut into it and split that part lengthwise between where you have not yet divided the ligament and dissolved the knot.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And be careful not to make a cut in the surface of the flesh and that you do not tear the artery here, causing blood to flow.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And then wash the remnants of the incision with wine or vinegar or cold water; and then place a linen cloth over it; this is a method by which the patient should keep the cloth over their tongue every night to prevent it from healing again. 
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	If a flow of blood occurs, place green vitriol (copper sulfate) over the area; but if the bleeding continues, then cauterize the area with a red-hot cautery which is appropriate for this purpose.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	Then treat it with other methods until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter .xxxv.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	For the given line:
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Here is the translation of the given line:
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation on the patient is that you open the mouth of the patient sixty times in front of the sun and consider the abscess.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see it of dark or black color, hard, in which the patient does not find sensation, then do not touch that which is gangrenous.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it has turned pale, in which there is moisture, then you insert your finger into it and incise that with a fine spatula, and cut it completely apart; and if blood flows during the time of your operation, then you place over it cloth trissat, which is green vitriol, until the blood is stopped.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then return to your work until you have removed it completely, washing it with sweet wine and salt; and treat that area with the other cure appropriate until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XXXVI.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the extraction of abscesses from the ears and those that occur in the throat, as well as other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When they occur in the throat region, these are glands that resemble a goiter, which appear externally and are called the ears. When you treat them with the methods we have described for division and it does not heal, then consider if the abscess is hard, dark-colored, and has little sensation; at this time, do not touch it with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of a rosy color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron because of the blood flow; first allow that to mature within, and then either you will extract that, or it will come out broken by itself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of a white color, like a root, and its stem is thin, then that is what needs to be cut.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation on it is such that you consider, before your operation, if the swelling has rested from the cautery with complete rest or if it has decreased by some reduction; and then have the patient sit facing the sun, with his head in your lap, open his mouth, and the servant takes between his fingers and pulls out the tongue using a noble instrument of which this is the form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And it should be made of silver or steel, and it should be thin like a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	So as you press with that the tongue and the swelling is shown to you, and you spit over it your saliva, then take some of it and insert that into the sore, and pull it outwards as much as you can. 
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And here is the translation of the given line:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	And it is similar to forceps, but the ends of it are curved, such that the opening of each one is aligned with the other, sharp, which is made of iron and well-tempered.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	But if this instrument is not at hand, then cut it with a spatula of which this is the shape: And let it be sharp on one side, blunt on the other.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And since you have cut one piece, cut the other in the same manner of incision, and then the patient should be washed with cold water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is bleeding, wash with water decocted from pomegranate peel or myrtle leaves and similar astringents until the flow of blood is stopped, and then treat it until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And sometimes there may appear other abscesses on the cheek or around the ears, and incise those in the same manner as I have described for cutting two pieces.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I have already treated a woman with an abscess that had formed on her cheek, which abscess tended to a brown color, was of little sensation, and had already closed her cheek, causing her to breathe through a narrow passage. She had been forbidden food and water, and she was nearing death if it had lasted one more day or two.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had risen so much that it was halfway between two channels, ready to burst out through two paths.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	And I carefully cut and inserted one of their fingers into it, then pulled that finger out, and a large portion was drawn out. Then I incised the other side where I understood there was another opening, then I forced open its mouth, and grasped its tongue, and then I placed the finger back into that abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then I cut away a large part of it, and only a little blood came out.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Therefore, the womb of that woman is absolutely diseased, and she should start drinking water immediately, then eat food. So I did not stop incising that swelling many times for a long time, and another swelling would occur in place of the previous one, which I continued to incise as long as it persisted.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Therefore, I brought this and cauterized the womb of the patient, thus stopping the additional bleeding; then I left, and did not know what God would do with that person afterward.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter XXXVII.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	On the incision of a swelling when it is abscessed.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When catarrh affects the swelling, and it is abscessed and elongated, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is in a part that is thick and round, then it is called a bubo.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	However, when it is treated with what we have mentioned in the division and you do not approve of your treatment, and you find that the abscess has already receded and become subtle, then you must incise those that are added roundly; and if it extends to that length and is bloody, of dark or black color, and does not affect the feeling, then you must attempt the incision, for there is fear for the patient in such a case.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	When you see that second part according to the method I have described about its whiteness and length, make the patient sit and press their tongue with an instrument whose shape is suitable for this purpose, then insert the ounce into the new area, pull it down, and cut that part using one of two instruments which are mentioned in the incision of two halves.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And it is necessary that you do not incise beyond what is adjusted to its natural boundary with an addition, for if you incise further, you will damage their speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And then for the incision, use what we have recommended in the incision of two melons, and care for it so that it may heal.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the patient was frightened by the incision made on him, it is necessary to use ingenuity in the cauterization of his fear, and the method of the cautery on him is only with sharp water. You place the head of the patient on your thigh, then press his tongue with the instrument we have mentioned, then take the water which we have specified in the chapter on cauterization, and heat it with that live cause, and hold that which is neither too thick nor thin, and fill the concavity of the instrument which has this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Let the extremity of it be concave like a spoon's concavity where the medicine is placed, and place the instrument with the medicine on the ulcer. The patient lies on his side so that saliva or mucus from the mouth of that person does not flow down due to this internal medicine onto the throat, thus preventing such a cause from affecting it.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	Then take your hand with the medicine and apply it to the uvula for a short period of time until you see it become darkened and soothed by the action of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you want, take a cloth and wrap it around the end of the ray, and submerge the cloth in the medicine, and insert the ray with the cloth into a tube until the cloth adheres to that tube, and do this as many times until you achieve what you desire from the cauterization of the grape, and then let it dry until it falls off after three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to repeat the medicine, do so, and then for the cauterization, clean around the area with a cloth soaked in oil, and modify that which is in the circle of it from the medicine, and wash it with cold water, and treat it externally with fomentation, and internally with decoctions until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this type of treatment is safer than incision and lasts longer in terms of duration.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Sometimes the uvula is treated with something more subtle than cauterization and incision, for it is cured by sublimation in this manner: take calamus, hyssop, origanum, rue, astringent herbs like sciacquite arabic, chamomile, fennel, and similar herbs; combine all these ingredients or some of them in a pot, and let them be submerged in sour wine, and boil; the pot should be well sealed with an appropriate lid, and place a tube in the middle of the pot on which is placed a concave instrument made of silver or brass.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And insert the extremity into the patient's mouth until the steam reaches the uvula over the pharynx, until the uvula is moved or obscured.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And then apply to those dry spots where it is dry, and be careful not to perform this treatment at the beginning of the appearance of abscesses, because it would aggravate the abscess, and you should not do that; instead, you must declare the presence of an abscess with cautery.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	And if this instrument is not available to you, then take a reed and attach a hen's egg at one end, so that the patient's mouth can be opened, because the eggshell prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On the extraction of thorns and other foreign objects that adhere in the throat and other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Dry spots adhering in the throat or fish bones or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then you must extract what is visible of those objects, on which cast your sight, by pressing the tongue with an instrument in front of light, so that you can see clearly what is in the throat.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And what does not appear and is hidden in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because the cause closely attached to the throat will be forcefully expelled through vomiting; or that the patient swallows a piece of onion or radish of lettuce or a piece of dry bread; or take a piece of dried sea sponge, and strongly moisten it with honey, then make the patient swallow that, because when it reaches the place where thorns are and are extracted, it will be forcefully expelled.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And also take an eel and wrap it well with honey, and place it inside and gently extract it; or take a leek and gently insert it and gently pull it out.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	And if it is not forcefully expelled by those causes which we have mentioned, then use an instrument made of lead according to this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And it should be thicker than a small tube, and at the end of it, there should be a cavity that you can easily insert into their throat.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And the patient should raise their head up, and be careful not to touch their throat bone so that it does not harm them or push against the bone or spine, or let the doctor do this with their hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	And yet, the patient should intervene more, using his knowledge of the location of the attached cause and pressing into it, and pulling his hand with the instrument on it, all according to the quantity that has been prepared for him inside before being bandaged.
Capitol .xxxix.	Capitol .xxxix.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	From the extraction of the leech attached to the neck.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When the bloodletting is treated with what we have said in the division of the cure with medicines and you do not conform, consider now on the belly of the patient under the sun, since you have examined the tongue of him with the instrument that we have recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore, if you use bloodletting, extract it with a small needle or with subtle actions properly.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible for you to extract it with that method, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the wound of the patient, and then place a heated iron in the concavity of the cannula, and do this as many times (until bloodletting is complete and it leaves the wound) and the patient must abstain from water for the whole day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	Then take a vessel full of cold water, open the mouth of the patient over it, and wash the mouth with it; do not let any of that water escape and have the patient spit out the water every hour alternately with their hand, for bloodletting will stop as soon as it feels the water. 
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, so that it may fall into place.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not work, then you repeat the fumigation several times, and abstain from drinking alcohol, eating salty foods and spices, and do not drink water. And thus, it is necessary that this regimen be followed.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument with which bloodsucking (or perhaps "bloodletting") is performed on the gums when it is seen; and it resembles forceps in some way, like tongs, but it has a certain curvature:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
Capitol .xl.	Capitol .xl.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the summary of the discourse concerning abscesses and their incision.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	These abscesses are various types, in various ways, according to their recall, each one in this book. 
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And thus there are differences in puncturing and drying them by two methods, of which one is through the type of abscesses you introduce into them; and by this, we counteract the humidity.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second method is for the areas where accidents of the body occur, because an abscess occurring on the head is different from an abscess occurring on the buttocks; and an abscess occurring in a fleshy area is different from an abscess occurring in a joint; and each of them has its own treatment by operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And more about abscesses, some of which should not be punctured until near the maturation of the pus or their completion.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	And other abscesses which should be treated when they are cross-shaped and not yet mature according to their completion, such as abscesses that are close to the joints; for an abscess near a joint prolongs its existence until you can empty what is inside it, and if left untreated, the ligaments or nerves of that joint may be corrupted, causing contraction of the member; or if the abscess is near a principal limb, do not delay perforation until it ripens on its own, lest it affects the principal limb; or if it is near the buttocks, then puncture it even if it is not fully ripe; and you should not pierce it when it is raw and not completely digested, but only that which is near the buttocks so that its pus does not corrupt and spread within the area of the buttocks, causing a fistula, or for it to become such that it cannot be healed.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	But you must know the time of the abscess puncture, and this is when it has matured.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you must know that it has matured when there is the reduction of pain and the cessation of fever, and then the decrease in heat and pulse, and the sharpness at the head of the abscess, and the other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And you must know that the puncture should be made in the lowest part of the abscess where the pus is located, and the pus should come from the prominence for proper healing.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And the puncture should always be made along the length of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in areas of the hands or feet, and in places of veins, tendons, nerves, arteries; and finally, in all similar locations where there is no reflection; for in those that do reflect, use puncturing according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	But when the abscess is in a fleshy area, it is better to delay the puncture until its digestion is confirmed according to the second stage, as we have said; for if you puncture it before that, the suffering of the poor person from it and much filth is prolonged, and the lips of it become hardened and its depth increases.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	And here is the translation for the given line:
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And you must administer a small puncture, and in large swellings a large puncture or wide opening or multiple incisions according to the diversity of the size of the swellings.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And there are other types of swellings in which the skin must be indented and incised; when it is done thus, like cutting bread, and once it is done, it stays that way, just as if you were to cut into many boils or buboes.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And there are those that are incised with a section having three angles; and there are others in which it is cut in the shape of a pine leaf, such as the swellings on the ankles.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And there are those in which a round incision and a crescent-shaped incision are administered, similar to these.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	But for those that are not like superficial lion swellings, you must pierce them with a superficial or flat puncture only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the swelling is large and has already collected much pus, you must pierce it, and do not hesitate to extract all the pus at once; first, remove some of it, then apply a poultice to the swelling on the next day, then extract a larger portion, and repeat this multiple times in stages until it is completely drained.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And especially if the patient is of weak constitution, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old person in decline, because the animal spirit often dissolves with the discharge of pus, and the patient may quickly die, and you operate on them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Take care of this chapter with great caution, and when you make your puncture in which you pierce these abscesses, it is necessary that you clean the wounds and then consider whether the wound from the abscess is slight, or if it is a flat section; then administer the poultices of oil or old cataplasm. And if the abscess is large, and the cracks from the puncture are many, then it is necessary that you place some material in each part until they come together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the abscess a part of the chain is severed or you have made it concave around its circumference, then it is necessary that you compress it with old cloth or make a bandage from oiled fabric; just as when you draw out pangs or roots, moisten it; and tighten it by the third day; then treat it and cure it with whatever salves are needed until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	But if blood flow occurs during the time of your operation, then you should administer cold water and sour wine in which you soak a piece of oiled cloth, and place it over the area of the bleeding multiple times.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	But if the bleeding persists, then it is necessary that you administer treatment and cure using powders which I have recommended in various places of this our book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	And if it is in the winter season, and the location of the swelling involves many nerves, then you must infuse pillows with wine and hot oil, and place those over the affected areas.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is summer, and the areas are fleshy, then you must place poultices soaked with water and oil or with wine and oil, and all of this should be rubbed in until the third day, as we have said, and then you must lance the abscess, clean it out, and administer to its treatment what is appropriate for it until it is healed.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the treatment of abscesses universally, but according to the method of distinction, I have already said about each abscess in what manner its cure should be carried out individually by chapters.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XLII.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Of the section of abscesses which appear in the nape of the neck.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the nape of the neck, small abscesses appear, and they are similar to nodules that contain tunics which are their formation; and their contents are particles.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And from them are pustules, and those contain moisture similar to lime water.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And from those are the ones that contain moisture similar to powder, and they resemble each other; and among them are the stony ones, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the incision of all and in the extraction of those, there is no fear, because the extraction of those does not cause contrary curvature.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in the incision of those is that you express them with an instrument whose form is appropriate for this, which is called a probe, until you know what it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	For if what it contains is moisture, then you should divide it with an incision along its length by making a superficial cut in the following manner:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And it begins at the section of line .B. within line .G. Thus, when the humidity is evacuated, then you scratch that skin which contains that humidity, and do not leave any cause behind, for if some cause remains, relapses occur frequently.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then submerge a cloth in Egyptian ointment, if it is available, and if not, in water and salt; and fill the wound with that and leave it inside for another day, because with this you corrode everything that is rotten from that membrane.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then apply over that area Egyptian ointment secondly and thirdly if you need it, until you are convinced that there is no breakage at all of that film; now treat the wound with an ointment until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if the abscess contains fatty nodes, then you should incise it in the following manner:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	using a section shaped like a cross, and insert once between the two lips of the section and scrape it from all sides, and exert your strength in extracting the membrane which contains that.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	But if your arrow encounters resistance, then do what I tell you first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly treat the calcified abscess with incision and cure as I have told you; incising a calcified abscess is easier, for it has little blood and little moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And sometimes some of these abscesses that are on the head in some people contain no moisture at all; the cause is that I once incised an abscess on the head of an old woman and found the abscess to be like a deaf stone, rough, white, which could not be crushed, and if anyone were struck with that, it would injure them.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	And in other swellings or accidents on the head apart from this case, which is not within this chapter, such as the swellings that come to children's heads and affect the roots of the ears, but the section of these all shall be a superficial section.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And stop the perforation of those from the lower part so that the body is relieved of the purulent matter in the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And then treat those areas with whatever is appropriate for that treatment.
Capitol .xlii.	It appears you've provided a section or chapter heading, "Capitul .xlii." which translates to "Chapter XLII" in English. This indicates the beginning of the forty-second chapter in a text. Without additional content following this heading, there isn't any further context or sentences to translate. If you have more text from this chapter that needs translation, please provide it!
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Regarding the treatment of scrofula, which occurs in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Motás veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And thus those that occur in the groin, and those masses that are generated between them, and all scrofula of those is within its own tunic, just as in the knots and abscesses of the head, just as we have recounted.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the types of these scrofula are diverse, for some are stone-like, and others contain moisture, and there are malignant ones which do not obey to cure.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, in that which you see of good disposition upon touching it, the color of which is similar to that of the vein, and is swollen throughout its entirety, and is not attached to any nerves, veins, or arteries, and is not inflamed, you should incise that with a sharp superficial cut from above the part down to the line G within the B line, and scrape it thoroughly, then extend both sides of the swelling with tweezers, or with two pairs if necessary, as we have said in treating swellings on the head, and extract it bit by bit.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more cautious that the vein or nerves not be cut during the incision.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And let the blade not be too sharp, so that it does not injure your hand during the incision or upset the patient, and you cut what is not necessary to cut; for if you were to cut a vein or artery and prevent yourself from continuing the operation, then apply powdered vitriol or other powders which stop blood flow to the wound, and tighten the wound, allowing that which rests the sharpness of the swelling and softens the wound so it begins to heal.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is cut off.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Then return to your operation before you have completed it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then examine with your index finger if there is any cause of the other small swellings, thus cut and clean those.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is near the large vein of the swelling, then you must not cut that swelling at its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Before that, it is necessary to wrap it with strong doubled cloth and to leave it so that it falls off by itself without harm.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the wound with old cataplasm that you have already submerged in Egyptian ointment, and then treat it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you cut that swelling entirely, then you must bring the two edges of the wound together and sew them immediately so that there is no remaining excess material.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that there is excess material due to the size of the swelling, then you must understand how to cut at the root of it, remove it, and apply stitches as mentioned.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for those swellings that contain moisture, pierce it with superficial punctures where you see the site of maturation, and make incisions to drain the pus at the base of the swelling, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then administer punctures, using cantharides with ointment and similar substances, so that it corrodes what is rotten from the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And then when you see the wound already cleaned, now you treat it with an ointment of generative flesh until it is healed. 
Capitol .xliii.	Capitol .xliii.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	From the incision of the pus pocket resulting from an abscess in the armpit.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients described this incision in the armpit, and I have not seen anyone in our land perform such a procedure.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the speech of those [individuals]. 
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	And in those who have abscesses caused in the mouth or throat or both ears, when the disease is not in the bone, one must operate on the section of the epiglottis to avoid the destruction that is caused by perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, when we want to do this, we should incise the epiglottis leaving three rings of the epiglottis intact, or four with a small section through its width in the area between two rings by quantity, so that the cut is on the cartilage, not on the membrane, and this location is suitable for cutting because it lacks flesh and the blood vessels there are sparse.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is cautious, it is necessary to extend the ligament of the jaw with care, and then cut the ligament until it reaches the canal, but avoid the blood vessels if any are present.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	Then incise the membrane as we have recommended; it is indicated over the section of the canal by the flame which is that secretion mixed with what is discharged from it and by the interruption of the voice.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Therefore, when the time is suitable for the feared perforation, bring together the edges of the wound's ligament, and sew them with just the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that promote flesh growth for healing.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Albucasis says that the summary of the discourse we have recounted is that some of these abscesses have already blocked the throat of the patient, and the patient has come close to death, and their breath is cut off, and some proceed to incise the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe at the site of the wound through some respiration and be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And by this, the wound should be left open until the wickedness of the disease is consumed; and this wickedness lasts for three days; and then after that, the wound should be sutured, and it should be treated until it heals.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen in my practice is that a servant took a knife and inserted it into her throat and cut a part of the windpipe with it, and I was called for her treatment, and I found the sound she made like that of someone dying, and upon discovering the wound, I found blood that had oozed from the small wound.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore, I must confess that she had not cut any vein or artery, and the air was coming out of the wound, and she treated it until it healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And it does not affect the servant if there is no hoarseness in their voice, and after some days they return to the improvement of their conditions.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that in the section of the hernia there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Capitol .xliv.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	From a section about an abscess that occurs outside the throat area, and is called a hernia of the throat.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This swelling called groin hernia is a large swelling according to the body's color, and it moves in women. 
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it is of two manners, for either it is natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural case, there is no need to treat it.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental is of two manners, one of which resembles fatty tumors, and the other manner is similar to an abscess, which is caused by arterial obstruction, and in that case, there is danger.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And it is not necessary to apply pressure with an iron unless it is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you should probe it and investigate it with your finger. If you find it resembling fatty nodes and it is not suspended by any veins, then incise it as you would with nodes, and extract it with what contains the flesh and bursiclam; otherwise, thoroughly examine its entire being, and then treat the area with appropriate healing methods until it is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLV.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	On the section of various types of nodules.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Of the different types of nodules, and I have already described all their types in the division [section or chapter].
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And it is necessary that I recount thus the difference between a knot and a hernia as if there were doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	So I say that in a hernia there is heat and fever and violent pains within until the boiling of the excess is calmed; and there is complete putrefaction when then the fever, pain, and heat cease.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	However, in a knot, there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains a hard mass that is like a lion's paw.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it depends on the color of the body, and its beginning is like a seed, and it grows as it wishes, being larger or smaller, and they are of two types: dry or fatty and contain moisture, and the colors of the moisture are spots, as I have said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you come to the treatment of a knot, you must extract it and trace it back to its origin using a method called intromission, as its form will be described in the chapter that follows this one.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And it is the method of investigating abscesses and all knots, which is that you take this instrument and insert it into the most moist area you find in the abscess, and you will stir the contents little by little with it until you know that the instrument has penetrated the core.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And then close your hand according to the size of the swelling, and then extract the foreign matter and examine what has been left in the wound.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the current humidity, of whatever color it may be, is external, then you incise it with a superficial section as I have said in the other swellings.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no moisture left from the foreign matter, then you know that it is pus.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And dry it with a section in the shape of a cross as follows:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	As I have taught you, suspend it with weights, and unroll the bandage from all sides easily, and protect the skin or sack, if possible, and extract that pus with the knot.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it breaks during the operation, it is not possible to extract that pus, and sometimes this happens, and then you must extract it in pieces to ensure nothing remains.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	For if any of it remains, whether little or much, the knot will return accordingly.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that some small part remains from him, then complete the wound with some sharp and strong corrosive powders and tighten the wound, place over it a cautery where there is an abscess, and treat that with another cure until it heals.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is a large knot, then you cut both lips of it and treat it with something that causes healing.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	And if the pulse is opposite, or non-pulsating, then you cut and fill the place with something trissed that is vitriol and leave it straight for two or three days before which the plague may decrease and the boiling of the blood may rest; and then return to dissect what is remaining of the knot. 
Capitol .xlvi.	Capitol .xlvi.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the forms of instruments necessary for section and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those which are the forms of the probes, and they come in three sizes, some are large, some are medium, and some are small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large probe is as follows:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the medium probe is as follows:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the small probe is as follows:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	They should be made of iron, silver, or have rounded ends appropriately, so that the instrument can be easily inserted into the swellings.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of the instruments used by experts, and they are named albered; one of them is called berid.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And they come in three sizes, for some are large, medium, and small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the large instrument is as follows:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the medium instrument is as follows:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of this experience is as follows:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It seems that the text is a mixture of medieval Latin and Romance languages, which makes it somewhat challenging to translate directly without context. However, I will attempt to interpret and translate the sentence based on its structure and content:
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And thus make round, thick needles, as large as big sewing needles with which leather is sewn, and they are made of citrus wood, or of iron or silver, and the best ones are those made of citrus wood.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And they perform the experiments with black feathers, which they recall as being used to open the fistulas within their cavities where reflections occur, and these are reflected using their light with those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And of three types, for some are long, and others medium, and others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and the stricture. 
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Form of the large lead figure:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Form of the experienced midwife with lead:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Form of the small lead pipe:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the tumors are of various types, for among them some are simple ones, which have only one curvature, and they are of three kinds: large, small, and medium.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And from these, hooks are used, and they come in three types.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of those hooks, they have two curves, and they come in three types.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And from these, they have three curves, and they come in three types.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all of these are necessary for their use.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Shape of a large simple hook, form as follows:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Shape of a medium simple hook:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of a small simple hook, form as follows:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Shape of a large hooked hook:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Shape of a medium hooked hook, form as follows:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Shape of a small hooked hook, form as follows:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Shape of a large hook having two curves:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Shape of a medium hook having two curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Form of an instrument having three curves:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the scalpels with which knots and swellings are cut and squeezed, and they come in three types, for there is a large one, a medium one, and a small one.
Forma de scapel gran:	Form of the large scalpel: 
Forma del scapel migier:	Form of the midwife's scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Forma de scapel pauc:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The extremities with which a section is made are sharp, and the other extremities are not sharp, and they are not placed in such a manner to simply rest, but rather for the purpose of causing movement during the lancing of nodes to avoid incision into veins or nerves, and through this, the patient is healed and finds some tranquility from the burning sensation that comes from the lancing of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of almagidas, and they exist in three varieties: large, medium, and small, as you will see.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of the large magda:
Forma de magda migier:	Form of the medium magda:
Forma de magda pauc:	Form of the small magda:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are made of brass and resemble a rod with which alcohol is made.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And at the side end, it is punctured with a hidden spatula and in that area, it reaches both inside and outside parts, as you desire, as you see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of the spatulae, which are hidden between the fingers causing the puncture of the abscesses and the patients do not feel them, and they exist in three types: large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of cupping with which the flow of blood is separated, and it comes in three types: large, medium, and small; the shapes are as follows:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut, e sian subtils.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And it is necessary for these species of cupping to be large, medium, and small, so that through them you can quickly draw off blood flow when needed, and at the times when first aid is not medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use them to cut blood throughout the body, and only use them in fleshy areas, such as in the creases of the arms and thighs, and in the creases of the breasts, belly, and knees, and similar fleshy moist creases.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And sometimes there are made from those instruments other small objects resembling scissors according to this form; by which the blood is cut off when it is done through phlebotomy or proper incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes circles are made according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVII. 
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	Regarding the treatment of men's breasts that are similar to women's.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And to that which you are about to do, it is necessary to incise those with a lunar section according to this form, from the line of 2 into the line of 7, and then evacuate all the thickness, and then fill the wound with flesh-forming medicine, and then adjust the two lips of the wound with sutures, and care for that until it is healed.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if the nipple droops towards the sides and is softened due to its size, as often happens with women, then it should be cut into two parts at a higher level, with two incisions resembling a lunar shape, each of which should enclose the other at their ends so that the larger line contains the smaller one according to this form from the line of 2 and the line of 7. Then evacuate the chain that is between the two lips of the wound, remove the fat, and administer what we have said about sutures and powders as necessary for the treatment until it is healed.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you cannot complete the incision of what needs to be cut due to the restlessness of the patient and the flow of blood, then it is necessary to fill the wound with cloth submerged in a corrosive ointment and leave it there until it corrodes the membranes of the fat, and then care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Capitol .xlviii.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	Of the piercing of abscesses that come from inflammation.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These abscesses that come from inflammation are of the kind of scrofula, hard, which contain a sac-like structure.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And of those that contain moisture; and those containing moisture should be incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from line G to line B. And once all the pus in the abscess has been evacuated, then fill it with old cloth and clean the inside again the next day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	Then the cloth should remain and be treated with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess is of the kind found in nodes and scrofula, then you should incise it in the same manner as we have described in the section on scrofula.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	And if the disease has spread to the point of gangrene, then apply a cautery as we have previously described.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLIX.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Of the procedure for lancing abscesses that may occur due to arteries or veins.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an artery is ruptured, and the chain that is above it is stabilized, then white spots may occur as abscesses. The signs by which it can be known whether inflammation and abscess are due to an artery or a vein: for when the abscess is due to an artery, it extends along in the region of the body; and when you press on the abscess with your fingers, you feel a rustling sound within it.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is due to a vein is round on the surface of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And lancing such an abscess is a mistake, especially in those that are near the armpits, and in the knees, and in the neck, and in many parts of the body; and it is large, therefore its treatment with iron should be avoided, and that which is on the extremities or on the head should also be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	But for those that are caused by the inflammation of the artery orifice, make an incision along the chain in its length; then widen the incision with hooks and approach the artery, and free it from the surrounding tissues until it is exposed.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And then place the needle and make it penetrate into the other side, and clamp the artery with double thread at two places — which is the technique I have taught you for the extraction of two arteries located in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And then separate the area between two ligaments with a spatula so that all the blood that is there comes out and the abscess is dissolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then administer treatment in which pus is generated so that the ligaments heal; and then treat it with appropriate ointments until it is healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if the abscess is due to vein rupture, then you should hold as much of the abscess as possible with your hand and bind it with a bandage; then insert the needle where you have held with your hand, and make it penetrate; and use a double thread so that you pull it out from the other side, and then tie off the abscess with a secure ligature as I have said to you in the vein treatment, binding both sides with the two ends of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	But if you fear that the thread might be pulled out, then insert the wire with the needle throughout the abscess starting from the tip of the needle first, and secure the wires at four points.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then dry the abscess in its center so that when what is inside it has been removed, you cut away the excess of the bandage and leave what is tied.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then place over it the pillow that you have soaked in wine and oil, and then administer the treatment which is made with plasters and ointments until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	And regarding the abscess that occurs due to twisting of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Thus, an abscess can occur in arteries and veins, and similarly, an abscess can occur in the nerves when there is a percussion or due to excessive labor, and by similarity.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it most often occurs in the areas of the ankles or the heel, or in any place where the joints are painful.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a severe abscess, resembling the color of the rest of the body. It often occurs in larger areas and when it is tight with intensity, the patient appears to be in a state of stupor.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not an abscess aggregated in the forefront of the body, and therefore the chain (of symptoms) is left behind. It causes pain throughout and does not move to parts in front or behind.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, of those things that are in the joints, it is not necessary to encase them with iron, for fear that they will cause contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	And if it is in the head or forehead, perform the incision with a spatula.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	And if the swelling is small, then take it with forceps and cut it away from the roots.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then you suspend it with an incision, and drain it, and then remove it; and close the wound with stitches, and care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .li.	Chapter II.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Of the incision of an abscess which occurs on the cheek or occurs in the abdomen.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	At times, certain individuals develop growths on their abdomens and other parts of their bodies, which are called fungual due to their similarity to fungi; the root of these is fine, and the head is large. The lips of these growths turn inward, and they can be small or greatly enlarged.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have seen one [person] whose abdomen had two growths that resembled fungi more closely, and there was no difference between them; they were white with fine roots.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And the lips of those growths were inverted and split open, and moisture continually flowed from them.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	So I incised them and found one to be about eighteen ounces in weight, and the other about six ounces.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	The procedure for incising them is as follows: consider whether the patient is moist and if the color of the growth is white, moist, and has fine roots. When you incise it with a broad spatula, have cautery irons ready at hand over fire, because sometimes when the incision is made, much blood flows out; if blood continues to flow, cauterize the area.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if the patient is pale and fearful, beware of applying iron [instruments]; instead, take fresh lead plaster at this time, and strengthen with that material in the manner we have described; leave it on for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Then apply pressure to the lead thread at the constriction; thus, do not stop strengthening the large lead until it is severed and falls off by itself.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	But if the condition is of a severe nature, then there is reason for fear and terror at the onset of it, especially in those that affect the abdomen.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	However, it is possible to cut away half of it, and then cauterize the area so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	Then treat that area until the wound is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And be careful not to assume that you should incise a condition that is of dark color, has little sensation, and appears slightly raised, for that is cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I bring this reminder about cran [cramp or pain] to mind for this reason.
Capitol .lii.	The given text appears to be a medieval medical treatise written in a language that resembles a mixture of Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. However, "Capitol .lii." seems to be more like an indication of a chapter or section number rather than a sentence with content to translate.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	For the translation of the given sentence:
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	The prominence of the navel is caused by various reasons; either by fissures in the spine which is above the belly, and you remove the membrane or intestine according to what happens in other ruptures; or by blood flowing from a vein or artery as previously mentioned, or by compressed air trapped within it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	If it is due to a fissure in the spine and the protrusion of the membrane, then the color of the swelling resembles that of the body's skin; there is no pain, and soon it appears in various positions.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then its position differs significantly from what we have described previously. When you press on it with your fingers, it becomes hidden and then returns; it moves forcefully within itself, and there is a great deal of noise at the entrance during bowel movement and intense labor.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	However, if it is due to moisture, then there is no pain, and it does not hide when you press it with your hand, nor is it constricted or swollen.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is due to blood, then with these signs, the swelling appears with a declining black color.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	But if it is due to flesh that has no movement, then it is a severe abscess, large and hard, implanted according to a quantity. 
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	And if it is due to flatulence, then touching him brings relief.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation on him is to consider at this time whether the prominence of the navel is due to arterial blood, or venous blood, or gas; at this time you must abstain from treating it, for there is fear and danger as I have taught in the chapter where I discussed swellings caused by arteries and veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine or the membrane, then you must order the patient to hold their breath and stand extended; then probe around the entire circumference of the navel with a tent; then command them to lie down between your hands on their back; then encircle the area around the navel where you have probed with the tent using a spatula; then extend half of the swelling upwards with a large uncia; then bind it around with strong plaster or wax and apply the method of binding appropriately.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	Then press the middle of the extended swelling over the binding and insert your index finger into that area to find the intestine; if you have found or felt it through the binding, then quickly withdraw and push the intestine back into the abdomen.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found the hernia, then take it with your thumb; and cut away its excesses.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	And if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then circle around that area, and return to your operation; take two needles and put in them two strong threads and insert the two needles into the circuit you have made around the abscess in a cross shape, which should penetrate; and then grasp the abscess in four parts over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, remove the needles and allow the area where the stretched flesh is to become pus-filled and fall off by itself; or incise that which has become thin and can be scraped away, and then treat it with appropriate ointments until it heals.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the prominence of the navel is soft to the touch or due to moisture, then you must hollow out the abscess as we have said and drain the blood or moisture that you find in it, and then treat it with whatever is necessary to consolidate the area.
Capitol .liii.	It appears you've provided a section marker, "Capitul .liii.", which indicates the start of Chapter 53 in a text written in an old style or language that mixes elements reminiscent of Latin and Romance languages (Italian, Spanish, French). Without further context or content from this chapter, I can't provide a translation or summary. If you have specific lines or content from this chapter that need translating or explaining, please feel free to share them!
De curacio de cranc.	This phrase appears to be in an old form of Romance language, likely related to Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French. It translates to:
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already said, in the division, about types of hernia and in what manner it is treated with medicines, and that it is necessary to avoid iron in its treatment so that it does not become ulcerated; and we have mentioned a hernia generated in the groin and precautions for its treatment.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancients said that sometimes a hernia is in a place where its removal is possible, such as a hernia located in the breasts or in the groin, and similar to members allocated for extraction of the whole, especially when it starts small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	However, when it is old and large, one should not approach it, for I have not been able to heal any from this, nor have I seen another who has succeeded in doing so.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation on it is when it is to be done as we have said, which is that you precede and leave the patient to purge of black bile several times, and then incise it if a clear swelling is found.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient with preparations in which they are placed for the operation, and then expose all the hooks that are needed for it; and then hollow out from all sides with a good thread to extract thoroughly until no cause of its roots remains.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the blood flow, and do not cut it lightly, and squeeze the areas, and clean the thick blood completely with your hand or with an instrument that is available to you among the tools.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if there is a thick blood congestion in veins or arteries that causes discomfort for you, then cauterize until the flow of blood has ceased, and then treat it with other healing methods until it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	It appears that you've provided a section marker or chapter heading, "Capitul .liv.", which seems to indicate Chapter 54 (since 'LIV' is the Roman numeral for 54). Without additional context or text to follow this header, there isn't more content to translate or explain. If you have more from this chapter or need assistance with this particular heading, feel free to provide further details!
De curacio de ydropici.	This phrase appears to be in an old form of Romance language, similar to medieval Latin or Old French. The translation into English would be:
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already discussed, in the division, the types of water-related dropsies, and the signs of each type, as well as the treatment with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that which is cured with iron is only the type of althitas alone, and it is not treated with iron for the type of timpanists nor for the type of yposarcha, for that would be fatal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have already treated this type of timpanist dropsy with medicines and your treatment does not bring comfort, then consider, for if the patient has already become weak, or is affected by another disease such as another type of dropsy, like those affecting the chest or abdomen and similar areas, then beware lest you treat him with iron, for there is fear over this.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	But if you find the patient to be of excessive strength, and he is only suffering from dropsy without any other disease, and is neither a child nor an elderly person, then the method of operating on him is that you lift the patient between your hands, and another assistant presses his abdomen with their hand, forcing the water towards the area below the navel, and then take a spiny spatula according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider if the generation of dropsy is due to the intestines, because at this time you must, with the incision, move away from the navel by the length of three fingers towards the side on the right of the pubis.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	And if the generation of dropsy is due to a disease of the liver, then your incision should be three fingers to the left of the navel.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of it is due to the spleen, then your incision should be on the right side. 
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And it is not necessary for your incision to be on the side on which the patient wishes to lie, because the superfluities will not flow to that place freely.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then pierce through the entire chain with the instrument, and insert into that section, and raise your hand with the spatula between the chain and the siphon, and you dilate that area; and if it is about the size of a fingernail or thereabouts.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then puncture the bladder until the spatula reaches the empty space, which is where the fluid resides.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then extract that and insert an instrument of which this is the form:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	And it resembles a thin silver tube; it is made of silver or iron or lion tin (bronze), in the lower part of which there is a small hole, and on the sides there are three holes: two on one side and one on the other side; and the end of it is cut according to the manner of a feather, just as you often see.
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the highest end is a ring, for when the instrument reaches the fluid, then that ring immediately closes over the instrument, thus allowing only a small amount of fluid to be evacuated, because if you evacuate more than what is necessary in an hour, the patient may die from the resolution of their animal spirit, or you risk causing their imminent death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	And evacuate according to the quantity of the patient's strength and according to what is indicated by the condition of the patient, the strength of their pulse, and their overall well-being.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	Then remove the instrument, and retain the fluid which is held back by the chain that catches the hole on top of the cylinder, reminding you to perforate it in that manner. 
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then repeat the procedure on another day if the patient can tolerate it, and extract a small amount of water, and do this for several days continuously, and be careful not to make any mistakes until only a little water remains.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	And if you fear for the patient and leave a large amount of water, then treat it by burying it in hot sand, induce sweating in a bath, and expose it to the sun for a long time; and treat it with drying medicines until it is healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And apply a cautery to the stomach, and to the spleen and liver near the extraction of the water, as I have recounted in what precedes.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter V.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	On the treatment of children whose urinary passages are not perforated at birth.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Sometimes some of the children are born from their mother's womb with their urinary passage not perforated (or it is very narrow or not in its proper place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, it is necessary to puncture with a subtle incision as soon as it is born using this method:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then place in the tube a subtle lead wire and tie it there, and keep it for three days or four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when he wants to urinate, let it be strained and the urine separated; then return the remainder.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not place the lead, it is possible that the urine which flows over the area will not clear this condition.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	But for those whose tube is narrow, it should be treated with a lead wire, as we have said, for several days until it is widened.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	But for those in whom the tube is not in its proper place, as mentioned, which causes them to be unable to urinate properly because the urethra deviates at the end of the penis, so they cannot urinate without lifting the penis with their hand; and it affects their generation, so that sperm cannot reach the uterus correctly, causing a significant illness.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the method of the operation on him is that the patient be placed face down on his stomach, and then extend the head of his penis with your left hand with a strong pull, and cut off the head of the foreskin at the location of the glans with an acute spatum, just as you would cut a feather, or shave some part, so that the middle of it comes to resemble the head of the penis and that the wound falls in the proper place according to what is needed.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And be careful during your operation for blood flow, where you often see this happen; and pause with him when you cut off the blood, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Capitol .lvi.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Of the condition where you encounter whitening in the foreskin at the head of the penis and corruption, blackening, and adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Motàs veùgadàs accidèys aquest àlbater en la verguà e es eminentia de carn làga.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And of those, one is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	And for the non-malignant one, you must suspend it with a fine thread and cut off the part so that all of it is separated; then place it in a poultice submerged in Egyptian ointment; afterwards, treat it with diafinicon ointment until it heals.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the swelling is malignant and of a leprous color, then you must apply a cautery near its beginning and its root.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	And if the swelling is on the foreskin of the uncircumcised penis, and part of the swelling is inside the foreskin while the other part is outside, then you must remove the part of the swelling that is inside at its beginning until it is stabilized; then treat the part that is outside, because when you treat it along with the foreskin, it is not guaranteed that it will not be torn.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And we have seen accidents in the genitals and foreskin involving blackening and corruption; therefore, you must remove all that is already blackened or about to corrupt or is already corrupted; then apply a line over it with honey, which is mixed with flour of pomegranate rind and crushed and sieved ashes.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And then treat that with another treatment until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	And if there is a flow of blood, then administer a lunar cautery according to this method:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	For a beneficial cautery is used for two conditions at once, namely for blood flow and for a plague when it is corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the penis is corroded and completely destroyed, then you must insert a lead catheter into the foreskin so that the patient urinates through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adherence only occurs in those whose foreskin is tight, and circumcision is not typically required; when adherence occurs due to an infection or an abscess), you must gently separate them using a blunt spatula until the bond is dissolved and the head of the penis is completely released.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to discern those precisely, then you must gently separate with a spatula some of the cause from the head of the penis and the foreskin, and this is because the foreskin, when it is thin, is easily perforated slightly due to its delicacy.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis using a thread that is already moistened with cold water so that they do not adhere again.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then it should be treated with a styptic wine until it is healed.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter LVI.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	On the cleansing of children and the treatment of what may occur to those who undergo circumcision.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution for continuity as with other wounds; however, since it is part of our procedure and our will, and those who undergo it are primarily children, it is necessary to perform this operation in the best way and with the least harmful method to ensure their health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books because it was not part of their laws. However, we have acquired this practice through experience. The reason I have found most artisans and barbers to use circumcision and cleansing with a scalpel and forceps is that they apply ointments with honey and perform anointment with oil.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have tried all these methods and found no better modification than with scissors, with suturing with wax like a nail clipping, because often you push the foreskin too far up, as the foreskin has two layers, and the inner layer remains below, and forcing it can lead to another incision and certain pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And with a cleansing that is performed by cauterization and is digital, which barbers use, the incision at the end of the male member is not safeguarded because it easily enters its channel.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	But in the operation with a nail, if you force it, you corrupt your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the umbilical cord of the child is short by nature, and many times it is born in such a way that it does not require modification, and I have seen this.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	As for the modification that is done with scissors and tying with thread, the goodness, my experience shows me, is that the scissors have proportional blades, so that the sharpness on top is just like the sharpness on the bottom; and thus when you press your hand so two proportional sharp edges come together, and incise according to a comparison in one motion; and compression of the thread is done with a figure containing the entire cord of the penis from all sides, with which there is no error at all.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the method of the first operation is that you should place the child in such a way, especially if it is one of those who need a little attention, so that you tie the thread only on its penis, and leave it that way until the next day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	Then make the child happy in every way that is possible for you to receive its understanding. 
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then have the person lie between your hands properly prepared, and do not be careless; and hide the scissors in your hand or under your foot so that the child does not see those or any of the other instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then insert your hand into the penis and blow into the tube, and pull it inside so that the head of the penis is seated, and then clean it from what dirt has been added to it.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then mark the site with a double layer of wax, and then place a second ligature slightly below that one, and then use your finger to press and indicate the location of the ligature tightly, and incise between the two ligatures.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then gently raise the tube and extract the head of the penis; and then let the blood flow little by little, as it is better; and apply powder on top and over the powder place a cloth spread with honey mixed in warm water, cooked with freshly pressed olive oil; and leave that on until the next day; and treat it with care until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The form of the scissors for modification is as follows:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	When the outer extremities are not cut and others are cut, ensure that the nail's root is not exposed, and the length of both sharp ends should be equal to the length of two hands equally.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	And the error in purification is that you might flee the intrinsic chain entirely, or part of it, which you should incise.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, it is necessary that you stretch the skin of the affected area with your fingernail before the inflammation appears at the site and that you incise it according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your nail, then extract that with tweezers and incise that.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	And if three days have passed, and the swelling remains under the foreskin as an abscess, then you should wait until the abscess ripens, and drain it easily, and incise it according to what is prepared for you.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And be careful of the head of the penis, for that is not suitable for it.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And thus treat it with what consolidates the wound from the powders which we have mentioned in the treatise on powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is incised too much on the scrotum, and you extend to the parts above, this will not harm him.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And rather treat it with what we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter LVIII.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction made by stones or frozen blood, or pus or flesh growths, and similar to those we have mentioned regarding the methods of treatment in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved and there is retention due to a stone already present in the neck of the bladder, then the patient must be bent over their knees.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And then position the feet of that person on their back and extend their abdomen from the part above their back, and the patient should hold their own side as much as possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Therefore, at this moment the neck of the bladder is constricted for the expulsion of the stone to the areas behind, so that the urine is released.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it is not dissolved by what we have said and the cause becomes vehement on the patient, then you must administer extraction from them with an instrument called a syringe, of which this is the form: It should be made of silver and its body should be thin like a quill of a bird with a fineness of a hair long in similarity to a palm and a half, at which point it should have a fine tube at its head.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the method of urine extraction is such that you take a folded cloth and tie it tightly at one end with good binding; and insert the ends of the cloth into the opening of the bladder, and cut away any excess wool with scissors if necessary, but insert it forcefully into the tube. And then attach the bladder with glue and egg white.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And lay the patient on the bed, and wash the bladder and penis with moist oils, olive oil, and rose water.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then insert the catheter easily so that it reaches the root of the penis; and then bend the penis upwards towards the navel; and then push the catheter further in there; and then continue pushing it until it reaches the bladder, which causes the patient to feel as if it has reached the desired place, and this is not always done according to this order, but rather in a way that goes with tortuosity.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then slowly extend the thread with the wool little by little, for the urine soaks the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Then remove it and use the urine for treatment, and continue using the catheter until the bladder is emptied and the patient finds relief.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter .59.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	On the quality of catharsis of the bladder using clamped instruments and similar tools that are appropriate for this procedure.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When there is ulceration or abscess in the bladder, or congealed blood within it, or obstructed pus, and you wish to instill water and medicines into it, then use an instrument called a clampcedra, and this is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	And here is the translation of the given line:
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that way three wounds are made: two from one side, thus as you see. 
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning is the concave area in which what is expelled resides, and it increases according to the quantity that obstructs it. Within this, when any cause draws from the humidities, it is drawn, and when it is expelled, with that it is drawn, and when it is expelled long, similar to how clampcedra is used with naphtha in naval battles.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, if you wish to extract moisture from the bladder, insert the end of a tube into the moisture, and pull with that which is being pushed up into the parts above, for the moisture is drawn into the cavity of the tube.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then insert the end of the tube into the urethra as we have recommended in the circumcision; and then push the moisture with what you are pushing, for that moisture reaches the bladder immediately, and the patient feels it.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The form of the catheter to be used for catheterizing the bladder is as follows:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it should be made of silver or brass, with the tip resembling a small feather, and leave a hollow canal inside.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And then take the bladder of an animal, and place in it the moisture you wish to introduce into the bladder, and then tie it tightly with a double thread at both ends, and warm that moisture over fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then insert the end of the catheter into the urethra.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then press your hand over the bladder with moisture, applying structured pressure so that the patient feels that this moisture has already reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	And if the bladder is not present, then take a piece of leather and make a circle out of it; and pierce it all around its roundness; then insert strong wax into those holes so that it is sealed; then add the circle in such a way that it is attached to the applicator, so that you can place it in the moisture, oils, and waters that you want to use.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	Then attach that to the instrument and use it in the same way as you would with the bladder, applying pressure with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter 60.
De extraccio de peyra.	On the extraction of stones.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already discussed in the division the types of stones and their treatment with medicines, and the difference between stones formed in the kidneys and those formed in the bladder, and the signs of each.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have spoken of the stone in which the operation is done by hand, and incision.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that which is fixed in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And I narrate it with clear exposition and abbreviation.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore, it is said that the stone generated in the bladder mostly affects children; and one of the signs of this is that the urine excreted from the bladder resembles water in its fineness, and appears as sand; and the patient rubs his penis, often feels pain, and then it becomes erect; and with this, you will recognize some of these symptoms.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And the treatment for children under fourteen years who have this condition is bathing; and it is a difficult cure for the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	However, in young people, it is somewhat easier because they are among those who can recover more readily.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And for the one in whom the stone is larger, the treatment is more difficult; and if it is small, the treatment is easier in contrast to the previous case.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, to treat this condition, we start by cleansing the patient with clysters which extract all the pus that is in their intestines; for this pus often prevents the discovery of the stone during examination.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then the patient is lifted by their feet and shaken and jostled so that the stone descends into the neck of the bladder, or jumps from place to place several times.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then make that incision between your hands prepared, and the patient's hands are placed away from their body, so that the bladder is entirely exposed, inclining towards the area below.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then clean that area and all of it externally.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Therefore, if you feel the stone in the space, then you should immediately operate on it with an incision.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you cannot remove it entirely with your touch, then you must anoint your left index finger with oil, if the patient is a child, or your middle finger if they are a mature adult, and insert that into their anus.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And clean around the stone inside where your finger is placed.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And gradually turn that [stone] inward toward the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And then press on that area with your finger, and push it out towards the external parts away from the site of the incision.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand; and command another minister to extend the testicles upwards with his right hand, and with his other hand hold back the cord that is below the testicles, away from the site where the incision is made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then insert a probe of the following shape:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And then split that which is between the anus and the testicles, not in the middle, but closer to the left thigh; and let the incision be made on that stone with your finger inside the anus, and make a transverse cut so that the external part of the incision is wide and narrows internally according to how much the stone protrudes as possible, and no more, because you will find it difficult to compress with your finger in the anus while cutting the stone, which makes the procedure complicated.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that some stones have angles and edges, which makes their extraction difficult because of this.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And from that, this is similar to a grain, and it is round, and it is made from the light secretion.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Therefore, if it is necessary for angles and margins to be adjusted in the fissure.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not a case of a wound that has burst open on its own, then you must press upon it, or stretch over it decently with your fingers, the tip of which should be like a file with which you rub over stone, and do not remove them abruptly; or insert into it an instrument with a subtle curved end.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	And if you cannot press on it, then slightly enlarge the wound, and if you see a flow of blood, cut into it strongly with powdered vitriol.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	And if there is more than one stone, then at the beginning you press your hand to the opening of the bladder, and then incise over it; and then gently push a little towards it; and similarly do this if there are more than two stones.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the stone is very large, then it is unwise to incise it with a large cut, for you cause one of two outcomes for the patient: either they die or they develop continuous urinary incontinence, because the area does not fully heal.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	And administer the expulsion of what has burst out, or extract it from the fracture with forceps, so that you remove it in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Therefore, once you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with pieces of aloe and dragon's blood, and secure it thus.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place upon that cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in oiled wool and warm water, so that the swelling may be alleviated.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And then recline the patient on their back, and do not loosen the bandage within the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when you have loosened it, wash the area with water and some oil, and then treat it with a fine plaster and a soothing ointment until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	But if in the wound you encounter a swelling that is hot and corrosive, and of such appearance as if the blood were congealed in the bladder, thereby prohibiting urination (and this is known by the discharge of blood with urine), then insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will cause corruption and putrefaction of the bladder.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then wash the wound with sweet wine, water, and salt, and oppose all kinds of infections with whatever is suitable for its healing until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And throughout the entire healing process, you must keep both thighs open and apply the medicines that are placed on the area.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and is in the flesh of the penis, and it is embedded in it, and urination is obstructed, then cure that before you resort to surgery, because many times this treatment is accused of leading to surgery; and I have already spoken about this, which is that you take an oiled iron probe, of which this is the form:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	The given phrase seems to describe an object or tool used in medieval medical practices. Here is a translation of the phrase into English:
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And then take honey, and apply it with that to the penis after removing the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then insert the instrument into the penis, penetrating easily until the perforator reaches the stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And rotate the perforator with your hand on that stone little by little, and you will pierce through until the other end penetrates; for the urine is then released.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then press your hand on that which is broken off from the stone from the outside part of the penis, for it is crushed and expelled with the urine, and the patient is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	But if this treatment is not suitable for you due to some reason that prevents you from doing it, then apply honey below the stone and more honey above the stone.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then incise over the stone on that penis between two ligatures.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then extract it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then untie the bandage and modify the congealed blood that has formed in the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to have a bandage of thread under the stone, except to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and another bandage above it, because when the thread is untied near the protrusion of the stone, the chain returns to its place and seals the wound.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And for this reason, when you untie the thread above, you must lift the chain to the parts above, or you should return it to its proper place, and seal the wound as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter LXI.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the extraction of stones from women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Stones in women are rarely formed.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	But if a stone does occur in any of them, then the cure for it is difficult and is prohibited by many methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One reason is that the female urethra is shorter.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that you do not find a woman so knowledgeable as to describe herself to the doctor when she is chaste, or is among women who have husbands.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is that you cannot find a woman well skilled in this art, especially in this operation with hand.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the site of the incision above the stone in women is distant from the location of the stone, therefore you need a deeper incision, and there lies the fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	And if necessity forces you to do so, then you must take a female doctor who is well knowledgeable, though she is rarely found.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	But if you are deprived of that, then seek someone who is quite skilled and subtle, or present a female midwife well experienced in the affairs of women, or a woman who has some knowledge of this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Therefore, have that person present, and command them to do everything you instruct, starting with the examination of the hymen; this is done to check if the woman is a virgin, so they must insert their finger into her genitals and examine the hymen.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Therefore, if you find it, press that area with your finger, and then command her to sit on it.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	But if she is not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the patient's vagina and examine the hymen, while placing her left hand on the bladder, and compress that area with good pressure.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Therefore, if you find it, you must gradually pull that area from the opening of the bladder towards the lower parts with all your strength until you reach the root of the thigh.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then make an incision at that specific point in the middle of the thigh where you feel the pulse from any part stopping and place the stone there, and do not let the stone be removed from that spot.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the incision should be small at the beginning; then insert the probe into that incision, and if you feel the stone, then enlarge the incision according to the amount needed for the stone to be expelled from there.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And know that the types of stones are many: for among those, some are small and large, sharp and rough, long and round, and having ridges.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore, you should know the various types of it by what you mean concerning what you want. 
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you see blood flow, apply finely ground vitriol to the area and leave it there for an hour until the bleeding stops, and then continue with your operation once the stone is expelled.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And have ready with you the instruments which are used in the extraction of stones from men, so that you may be assisted by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you see a flow of blood and know that the bleeding comes from an artery that has been cut, then apply powder to the area and press it with cushions and a tight bandage; do not repeat this; leave the stone and do not extract it, for by doing so the patient may die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	Then treat the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	When the sharpness of the blood has subsided over several days and the area has dried, then return to your operation before the stone becomes embedded.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter sixty-two.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On the section of an incarcerated hernia.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	An incarcerated hernia is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white sac, which is below the spermatic cord containing the testicle, and this sac is called the tunica vaginalis.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And sometimes it is in the very membrane that nature prepares for the part of the egg, between which is a shell that has already become another egg; and it is the chain of genetic material between the white part we have mentioned, and this is not anything else but yolk.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which affects the genitalia, for this material is infused into those areas, and sometimes it happens due to blows inflicted upon the genitalia.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this humidity has various colors, for the color of it is declining to yellow or to bloody, or red, or is black feculent, or is white watery, and this is what it is.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which it is known where this aggregation of water is as follows: for if it is in the white head which we have mentioned, then the swelling is round declining a little lengthwise like an egg shape, and the genetic cause appears, for the humidity contains that from all sides.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the humidity is in the proper fascia, then the abscess is round with parts of an egg, and for this reason it is thought to be another egg.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the tendon of the genitalia and the white membrane, then apply the feeling [likely meaning to apply a diagnostic touch or sensation].
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And when you want to know the color of the humidity, then you express the color of the moisture in the abscess by inserting a probe whose shape is mentioned beforehand; and according to what is seen on the vestige of the probe, judge of what is inside it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	And when we come to the treatment with iron, then it is necessary to command the patient to be bled if that is possible for you, and turn the body of the patient completely. 
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And then place him lying on his back on some support slightly elevated, and cover him with warm blankets.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then sit on the left side of him, and command the assistant to stand on his right side, who should extend his arm from one of the two sides to the groin area and to the part near the navel.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a broad spatula and split the groin along the middle length, near the penis.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And make the incision straight and equally distant from the line where you should cut the skin of the groin, until you reach the white membrane.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And evert that area, observe it, and be careful not to penetrate it; and when you evert it, make sure it is suspended with the most delicate and subtle probing using your eversion according to what is possible for you.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then pierce the watery sac with a wide incision, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate the two lips of the incision with forceps, and extend the bladder upwards; do not touch the chain that includes the genitalia, and cut the bladder in such a way as is possible for you.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And cut that [area] entirely or in pieces, especially its thin layer, because if you do not examine the incision carefully, there is no guarantee that the water will not return. 
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	And if you proceed with the operation from outside of his scrotum during the time of your surgery, then once you have completed the section of the penis, return it inside, and then sew together the two sides of the scrotal sac, and then treat that as you would other wounds until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the testicle corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary that you tie off the vessels which are near the spermatic cord, and extract the testicle, and then treat that as we have said before.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	But if the fluid is collected in two separate parts, then you know that there are two hernias; therefore, incise that part equally as you have done in the other one; and if it appears to you that an operation is needed, then perform it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then you should clean the blood and insert wool soaked in oil or oiled wool into the incisions; place over it other wool that you have soaked in wine and oil, and spread that over both testicles and the navel; and place over them folded cloths and pillows, and bind them with a bandage according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And then take two cloths and fill them with carded wool according to this form; and make the ends with which you press with a cot or wet wool, and attach them with ties to the waistband of the pants; one end should go between the buttocks, and the second at the crotch area, and two ends over each thigh, and two other ends over each knee, and all ties should be tightened on the waistband of the pants.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with cautery instead of sectioning with iron; and you should take a subtle scalpel-like cautery and incise the chain of the intestines with it, igniting it as we have recommended until the white membrane containing the fluid is exposed, and then you take the cautery in this form:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	And it is shaped like the Greek letter. 
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then pierce with that instrument, and heat it until all the moisture is expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then extend the instrument with hooks, and scrape with hooks, and cauterize with a subtly heated cautery; and cut as much of it as you can until you remove all of it; and be careful of the area so that the fire does not touch it.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is safer and results in less blood flow, and is better than an operation with incision.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if during the process of incision or cautery, an abscess forms or there is blood flow, then you must treat whatever complication arises from it, with a treatment that is appropriate as described.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the patient is weak and does not expect to withstand a second operation due to its severity, then administer perforation as I recommend here; this is when you are certain, based on what we have said about the signs, that the hernia is aqueous.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then you must have the patient sit on some raised stool, then pierce the abscess at its lowest part with a broad spatula, and maintain the piercing according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And let the opening be wide enough for all the water to flow out completely.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Then place your hand over the area and press it, allowing the remaining water to flow out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then treat it until the plague is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	However, if there is an obstruction to the flow of water at that time, you should puncture it: this is done only when the white pus in the opening of the wound causes an obstacle and prevents the discharge of water. At that point, you must introduce a probe or instrument into the wound with which the water from edema is extracted, the form of which has been described previously; or apply a small device to the compression area of the wound.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And know that the water may return and accumulate again after about six months or around that time; and when it accumulates again, it should be punctured according to the same method, so that the patient will thus spend their days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter LXIII.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	On the incision of a fleshy hernia and its treatment.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposios;
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I am recalling the operation in that case and the specifics of the abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, I say that abscesses form in bodies where the humors are composed and this happens for various reasons: either due to an excess of sharp and bitter fluids that are poured into the humors, or by percussion.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and it is not accompanied by pain, and it is a severe abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And often the abscess is hardened, of which the color is dark, and there is no sensation in it.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes it is caused by the constriction of the arteries, and by the inflammation of those vessels as already perceived in the recollection of it, or by the inflammation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	But that which is caused by the inflammation of arteries is known by the dispersion of the abscess when you press it with your fingers; and it should not be touched.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	But that which is caused by the inflammation of veins does not disperse when pressed with your fingers.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that on this type of tissue a section may be made and on other flesh; and you should incise the cord of the genitals, then extend the scrotum upwards to the parts above, extract what is in the white membrane, release the suspensorium of the vessels, tie them up, and then incise the suspensorium after you have released it from all parts of the scrotum.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	And so if the scrotum has already adhered to those fleshy parts, then you must extract the scrotum and make an incision there.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adhesion due to some cause within the membrane, or between the vessels, then you must release all of that adhesion and make a circular incision in it.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	But if there is a growth of flesh in the area of the adhesion that is behind, then you must incise all of that which belongs to it and extract the scrotum as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And so when your operation is complete, fill the wound with wool infused in rose oil and wine; then treat it with other treatments until it heals.
Capitol .lxiv.	The line "Capitul .lxiv." appears to be an indication of a chapter or section number in Roman numerals. It translates into English as:
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	For the given sentence:
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this illness, it is done out of fear due to the回忆之前的病因。 
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, we must speak of the operation that they perform first.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And it is said that you must place the patient on an elevated chair; then pull up the suspensor of the testicles to their proper places; then tie the cord of the genitals with your stated ties using tested threads on the penis; and have another assistant like yourself, and extend those with strong extension.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	Then make an incision with a sharp, broad spatula through a transverse section in the right area of the vessels so that the vessels are exposed.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	Then squeeze from all parts as we have said in the extraction of arteries, which are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	Then insert a needle with double thread into those areas, and tie one end of the thread at the front where you made the incision, and tie the other end at the back.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	Then make an incision in the middle of those areas along the length of the body, and extract what is aggregated from the foul and corrupted humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then treat the wound with a cure for other wounds in which you want pus to be generated so that it causes the vessels, from which one of two genetic substances flows, to drop, for this is not harmful.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	And if it happens to all the vessels, then it is necessary that the testicles be extracted or that the testicles are coagulated due to the veins by which they receive all their nourishment through the incision of the vessels, and that they are separated, or that they are coagulated so that they do not remain viable with those [vessels].
Capitol .lxv.	It seems like you've provided a chapter or section identifier from an ancient text, likely a medieval manuscript or medical treatise. The identifier ".lxv." translates to "65" in Roman numerals, suggesting this is Chapter 65 of the work. If you have more content from this chapter that needs translation or explanation, feel free to provide it!
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	This phrase is in a language that resembles medieval Latin with influences from Romance languages. It translates to English as:
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The advent of this hernia is due to a section that descends in the spine extended over the abdomen from the areas near the navel, because descending intestines from that rupture lead to some of the intestines.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the spine or from exertion by him, and these two types occur due to various causes: by impact, by jumping, by crying out, by lifting something heavy, or by similar actions.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of this, when it is due to an extension of the hip joint, is that it happens gradually over a long period of time, and does not occur suddenly, and there is inflammation similar within which the prepuce compresses the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of it is when it comes from cutting of the spleen, for at the beginning it causes sudden severe pain; and there appears an inflammation different from the previous appearance of the swelling, and this is due to the outpouring of the organ, and its body extends beyond the area of the spleen.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And sometimes it happens that the intestine protrudes through the tissue, and this type of intestinal hernia is called zirbal.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And sometimes it happens due to gas, and sometimes the intestine splits open, and here it is trapped, causing great discomfort to the patient, and at times it leads to severe and worsening pain, especially when pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of this kind of disease with iron, there is fear, for which reason it must be avoided in that case.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the method of the operation for this is to command the patient to push the intestine back into its cavity with their hand if it obeys its return, and then have them lie on their back between your hands, and lift their chest.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then stretch the cord which is the spermatic cord above, and incise the spermatic cord entirely along its length; then insert two hooks into the edges of the incision according to what is needed to open the incision with those.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the section is according to the quantity that it is possible for you to remove from it the pus.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then expose that sac which holds the cord of the testicles, until the white hard part of each side is revealed.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then you insert your finger into the area where the testicle lies, between the white sac that holds the spermatic cord and the second sac, freeing it from the adhesion that is behind the testicle.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then grasp the spermatic cord with your hand at its outer parts, and by doing so, stretch the white sac with your left hand, and lift the testicle with the sac to the section area; and command the assistant to stretch the testicle while you dissolve the adhesion behind it completely.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And feel with your fingers to ensure there is no cause for the intestine being wrapped in the hard white sac.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	But if you find any cause for it, then you push that part back into the abdomen.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then you take a needle with a thick thread made of seven threads, and insert it through the back end of the sac, which is below the spermatic cord, where the section lies; and then cut the extremities that protrude from the thread until there are four threads, and arrange some of them in the shape of a cross; and tie tightly with strong binding on both sides the sac we have mentioned that holds the spermatic cord.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then wrap the extremities of the veins and bind them tightly to ensure that none of the vessels that nourish those areas can transmit any harmful cause, so that an abscess does not occur here.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And again apply another binding according to the first binding, about three fingers away; then between these two bindings, leave from the scrotum where the testicles hang a length equal to that of a finger, and cut off all the remaining part following its roundness, and remove the entire hernia.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then make an incision at the part below the scrotum where blood and pus will flow, just as we have described in what we have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then apply wool soaked in oil and place it on the wound; administer the binding that we have described (and sometimes the white scrotum is cauterized, which we mentioned near the beginning of the fear of blood flow, because this often happens); leave the binding until it falls off by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	If the binding is delayed, then bathe it with warm water and place it on the area until it falls off as we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the wound with another method of treating wounds until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter LXVI.
De hernia ventosa.	Of gaseous hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this type of hernia, none have been seen to dare to cure it with iron (surgery).
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first method they described is done as we have recounted in the hernia treated with wine; which is that you tie the vessels near the section where it can be easily done; and then dry it around the abscess using something that opens it, allowing the vessels to fall inside.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And treat the plague as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter LXVII.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	On the dislocation that occurs in the ankles.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Sometimes there is a rupture in the ankles as we have said, and you must expose the area.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And do not attribute any cause of the hernias to the groin; and if you do, it is minimal; and it returns at all times.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	And if this condition is prolonged, an adjusted fissure is made in the sphincter through which you let the intestine descend into the sphincter; and this happens due to the extension of the sphincter, which occurs when it is stretched as we have said, because the stretching causes softening, and then the area becomes inflamed and protrudes.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the treatment of it is with cautery, as was mentioned earlier in the description of it.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And sometimes it is treated with iron according to this method: the patient lies on their back between your hands, and then dry the inflamed area of the rupture by drying it laterally according to the quantity of three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	Then strengthen the white sphincter that is below the colon so that it becomes exposed.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	Then take the probe and place it over the protruding area of the sphincter, and press it against the front of the abdomen.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	Then sew the two protruding areas at the end of the probe of the sphincter together using sutures.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then extract the end of the thread, and do not incise all at once, nor extend the wound, nor cause any other harm as I will teach you in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then treat that with the treatment of wounds, and when you incise the abscesses, clean that area and restore the wound before it is consolidated; for the incision is contracted and the prominence of the rupture is not adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cautery is better in this area, for it is more conducive to healing.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter LXVIII.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On the softening of the spermatic cord.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Often, the spermatic cord is softened in some men because the flesh between them is softened, and this is attributed to its care.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore, it is necessary for the one who is involved in its treatment to make the patient lie on their back, and incise the entire softened cord over the natural cord; then sew together the two edges with sutures.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you want, at the beginning soften the excess of the loosened chain with three or four boilings and a firm suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then cut between the sutures; and then treat for the healing of other wounds until it is healed and the pus has drained.
Capitol .lxix.	Capitol .lxix.
De castracio.	From the context given by the previous sentences and the somewhat Latin-like language structure, "De castracio" can be translated as:
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but for cause it is legitimate for me to remind you of it in this book; and the reminder of it is not necessary except by two ways, of which one is so that it be in the knowledge of the doctor when questioned about it, who knows the cure for the one to whom it happens; and the other way is that we often have need of castration of other beasts for our uses through them, such as mules, and bulls, and pigs, and similar animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore I say that castration is done in two ways: either by atrophy, or by making an incision and severing.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	But in the one that is done by atrophy, the method of the operation is to make the beast sweat with hot water until its testicles are softened and become loose and hang down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	Then take them with your hand while they are dissolved and do not allow them to reappear under the touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	But in castration done by incision and severing, you must hold the beast and press the cord of its testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And then apply the suspensory, and make an incision on each bone with a cut between two bones processes.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then incise that pus which you have squeezed out.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not leave any cause on those with epilepsy except the subtle epilepsy which is on the veins. 
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of castration is better which is done by atrophy, for atrophy leaves little cause of the testicles that make the animal desire mating.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And then treat the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	It appears you've provided a section marker or chapter title, likely from an ancient text, which reads ".lxx." This Roman numeral translates to "70" in Arabic numerals. Here's how it might be presented in the context of a medieval document:
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	Here is the translation of the given line:
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermafroditism in men occurs in two ways: one is where or appears in what seems to be the space in the scrotum of the testicles, in which area between two testicles resembles a female vulva with hair. 
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And sometimes from that area urine flows which is in the region of the testicles. 
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the cure is of three kinds: two for men and one kind for women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is necessary that you incise those tight tissues so that the swelling of that area is released, and then treat those areas with the cure for other ailments.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second kind for men, where you find urine that is in the region of the testicles, there is neither cure nor operation for it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	On swelling and protruding flesh due to causes in women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Swelling appears suddenly due to natural causes, within which it is compressed and forms a lump; and sometimes it increases in some women so much that it spreads as it does in men and even extends to intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Then it is necessary that you remove the excess swelling with your hand or with a scalpel by making an incision.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not delay in making the incision, especially near the region of the vagina, so that there is no flow of blood.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And then treat that with a treatment for wounds until it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	Newly born flesh is flesh that grows in the wounds of the mother until it fills them, and then it extends to the outer parts resembling a tail (and for this reason the early ones called this "tailed disease"); therefore, we must incise it as we would when dealing with lint, and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter LXXII. 
De curacio de alratica.	Of the treatment of arthritis.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Arthritis is when the joint of the woman is not penetrated, or the passage is narrow.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	And accidental is due to illness that has preceded it, and that which is caused either by improperly fitted flesh or by a subtle or thick foreign body.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it is caused either in the region of the womb, or on its sides, or in its upper pus, or in its lower pus, and you prohibit coitus, pregnancy, and childbirth, and strictly forbid menstruation. 
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the knowledge of that is obtained by observing the midwife, if the obstruction is visible, it's clear; but if it is not visible, then you seek it with your fingers or with a probe.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	And if the obstruction is due to subtle particles and has reached both lips, then you should probe and break that obstruction.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And you place cushions on both labia, and then put your index fingers of both hands inside.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman is on her back, her thighs spread apart, and then spread the two lips forcefully so that that subtle barrier is broken and the obstruction is opened.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take wool and soak it in oil and place that over the area, and keep the patient still for a day so that the incised area does not become disturbed.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	And if the abscess is large and thick, then you must incise it with a broad spatula or with a myrtle leaf.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	But if the obstruction is due to flesh, then suspend it with a hook and incise it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And use the medicines that stop blood flow from bites, such as agaric, dragon's blood, and ashes, applied with egg white.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a wide lead cannula so that the affected area is not disturbed slightly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And keep it for several days and administer a decoction of the dry [herb/material].
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And then it should be treated with another stabilizing treatment until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes it happens in the natural formation of other flesh, and then you must incise it according to this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	And if this is due to a chronic abscess, the chronic abscess which is in the breast should not be treated with iron in any manner.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter LXXIII.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	For the given sentence:
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already said in the division the types of those and the signs of those, and to say thus those that receive cure and those that do not receive cure.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore, I say that hemorrhoids and tumors when they are in the interior of the main channel and do not appear to the senses, in those cases no cure should be made with iron.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	And those which are in the openings of the womb over which one feels pain, those are the ones that are treated.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And it is necessary that you place the woman in cold water and then extend the labia with scissors or with a rough cloth, and incise them with knives.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then sprinkle on those wounds the flow of blood with one of the styptic powders such as derived from mastic and similar to these.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then foment the patient's feet for an hour, and then place them in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the flow of blood persists, then bathe her in a decoction of sumac, pomegranate peel, and walnuts, and similar items.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And then take flour of oats, mix it with honey and sweet wine, and make a plaster with it to apply on their back.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the blood is congealed, it is good; otherwise, attach two cupping vessels and perform scarification on the nipples.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take wool and soak it in the juice of coriander or in the juice of arnica or in the juice of woundwort mixed with fermented wine, and apply it to the area; and then treat the area with ointments until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	If you come across something that has a harsh appearance, make sure you inscribe what appears to you in it according to what I have said in the same manner. 
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And treat that which is inside so that it may be healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	It seems like you've provided a chapter or section identifier from an older text, likely indicating the seventy-fourth chapter or section. If you have a specific sentence or passage from this section that you would like translated or explained, please provide it and I will be happy to help!
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	This phrase appears to be in an archaic form of Romance language, similar to Old French or medieval Latin. Here is the translation into English:
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Motives similar to this can be applied in the major areas, such as cancer and stone abscesses and ulcers and adenitis and snakebites and hemorrhoids and raguarrias (a term that seems specific or archaic) and tumors and other types of abscesses.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already described these diseases and their types and their signs, and their treatments in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And I must speak in this treatise about an abscess that appears on the breast when it is one of those abscesses that collect pus, and if you want to know how the operation with iron is performed.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Then you must consider whether the pain of the abscess at its beginning is acute with percussion and phlegm and fever, and sometimes it reddens, and if you press on it, then do not treat it by perforating it, and cure it with that which helps the maturation until the acuteness of the symptoms ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And now you must place the woman on a bench that has two parts; and she should recline on her back and adjust her feet to the part below the abdomen, and her thighs should be spread apart, and place her arms below her head, and bind them with suitable restraints.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	Then the midwife should follow the correct method and administer the instrument with which the opening of the mother is widened, the form of which will be detailed in the following sections.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And when you want to administer this instrument, you must place it gently at the entrance of the mother's vagina, and the part of the instrument that enters the mother should not be larger than the entrance of the vagina and should guide the patient. 
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	And if the instrument is larger than the opening of the mother [likely referring to a body orifice], then you must place pillows on the tissue around the opening so that no instrument can enter into it.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And it is necessary that you stop the flow that runs through the tube above and that the minister hold the tube and rotate the flow until the opening of the wound is exposed.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the pus appears and is touched with the hand and it feels warm and moist, then you must dry that area by lifting it up with a spatula.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the pus is evacuated, then you must apply to the wound a cloth soaked in rose oil or virgin olive oil in which some styptic substance has been added; and place a bandage on the incision in the area of the main wound.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And place outside the womb and over the genitals clean wool submerged in water in which mallows have been boiled.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then it should be treated for about two days with ointment, which you should apply until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And sometimes the wound and the area around it are washed with water and honey, then with water in which juice from lily or longwort has been boiled, and then return to using the ointment.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is deep inside a swollen area, then you must avoid treating it with iron; instead, treat it with what we have mentioned in the section.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter LXXV.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach the midwives how to treat unhealthy embryos when they appear according to an unnatural form.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	It is necessary that the midwife recognize at the beginning the natural form of childbirth by its signs, and this is when you see the woman expressing discomfort in parts of her body and desiring to smell the air. Additionally, if she is agitated by what is happening during labor and hastens the expulsion of the embryo, then you know that this birth is following a natural form, with the head being expelled first, and the second part hanging or suspended from the navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore when you see those signs, then it is necessary that the patient's belly be compressed so that the embryo descends easily because when they are placed on their head, tell them the second one, and clean away those excesses with a good purification. 
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	When necessary, it is required of the midwife that she be wise and subtle in all those matters, and that she guard against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And I am showing all the figures of those [conditions], and what device is in them so that it may be signified by this and stand upon this.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the flow is released over her head by natural exercise, and if it becomes strong on the woman and occurs in a difficult part, and sometimes her strength is already weakened, then do this treatment, or give it to women, and evaporate its seed with fenugreek juice and with humid oils.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then insert the midwife between the small of their back and split it with the second tool, or scrape that area with her fingernail until you remove what is inside of it in terms of moisture.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the woman's abdomen until the fetus descends.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	And if it does not descend, then the woman should be given a mixture of psyllium mucilage and fenugreek mucilage.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	Then command the patient to be pressed and induce sneezing with condiments; and hold their mouth and nose for about an hour, because the fetus will come out soon. 
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if both sides of the wound are torn at the beginning, then you must reduce them with ease little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	And if [the patient] does not obey the treatment, then place the woman on a chair and lift her feet up, and then lower the chair to the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall due to the jolt.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the edges are not turned inward and the wound is torn, then incise those areas and extract the remains of the wound or lift the body part to the hand with a cloth and extract it evenly, because it will be torn outward.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	Regarding the expulsion of the embryo from the legs' area.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When you place your hand on the patient's feet, then you must push them upwards, and then turn the foot slightly, and then equalize it, and then take one of their feet and stretch it little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	When you have entered between the thighs, then you command them to strain, and cause that sneeze with a stimulus, because it will be purged if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not purged by what we have recommended, then you gradually return the foot until you place it in its second natural position, because it will be purged with a gentle insertion at that point.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is not resolved by everything we have recommended, then take some alum and dissolved gum, and pound them well together in a mortar, and then apply this mixture to the woman's womb, at the lowest part of her abdomen.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	Then have that person sit in tepid water until it reaches the hypochondria (the areas just below the ribs on either side of the body).
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when you see that the parts of him have become softened, then perform fumigation with myrtle and apply it to him.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when you have smoked it [the patient] for an hour, then make them sit on a chair, and then make that person sneeze and open their mouth wide, and lift them up, and press the lower part of their abdomen with gentle compression, because the effect will soon be expelled.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the fetus will come out according to this form, then you gradually insert your fingers; and the woman should be laid on her side, with his feet hanging down, and those [fingers or hands] should be resting on the ground, and complete the delivery of the child.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And then press on the stomach of the patient little by little, and then extract what remains under their feet from between the ears into a prepared receptacle below. 
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the flatulence has not been released, then take their feet and move them vigorously, and then press what is above the hypochondriac regions little by little until the gas rises to the upper parts.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And then insert your fingers and gently widen the wound little by little, and command the woman to strain herself while the wound is being cleaned out. 
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Exsudate flows longitudinally along one of his arms.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	Be inventive in reducing the hand of the patient, but if you cannot reduce it, then elevate the limb and make it move.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if walking is not possible, then make the patient lie down on the ground, and vigorously shake their thighs with percussion, and then administer remedies which are moist and composed of mucilaginous substances.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the birth has come, then have her sit on a chair, and immediately attend to the reduction of the hand, and align the baby according to its natural position, and make the woman sneeze and command her to compress herself internally until she is exhausted.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Essentially, this text describes a medical procedure or observation. Here is an attempted translation of the provided line:
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	It is necessary that the midwife hold the hand of the infant and then turn it little by little, so that this is done with ease.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is mixed together, and then place over the nose what we have recommended of oil and poultices.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And then you command him to moan little by little, and when you have done that, now lay him on a chair and command him to lean on the right side, and then order him to be compressed; and make him sneeze with certain conditions. 
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The translation of the given line is:
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When they say to extract the horror from the mother according to this method, consider, and then you cut with your nail into it so that the moisture is evacuated.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the fetus is hanging over the face and neck of the mother, then you incise that area below the chin, so that it does not get stuck and cause death.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And then push the fetus into the parts inside where you place that which is necessary, and instruct the woman to compress herself several times, and it will come out by itself with a light emission, if God so wills.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The birth of twins or multiple fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that twins are often born, and sometimes three or four are born, though this is rare and seldom occurs; however, their causes are due to nature, not life. 
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And counting those, even if they are multiplied, one after another, and they are separated by a chipac, distinguish them within the ligament in the navel of each of these. And sometimes they are expelled as though it is something done by a light natural excretion, and sometimes they come out due to an unworthy excretion, just as we have recounted.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if there are difficulties in the birth process and it leads to what we have said about non-natural positions, then you treat those as we have described.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is skilled and does this with ease and subtlety, and with care, and adapts her method according to each position as she prepares for the safe delivery of the child.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remember what is formed in the womb from embryos and about miscarriages.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Sometimes in the womb, one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even more than ten are formed. It has been verified that a woman aborted six, and another had ten fully formed, which was caused by the measurements of the wise experts. 
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all of this must be within the knowledge of the midwife who closely observes that small sign of it, and thus applies herself to it with what is necessary.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Capitol .lxxvi.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	Of the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you treat the dead fetus as we have described in the section on medication and it has not been expelled, and you are forced to use manual operation, then you must consider whether the woman is of sound health and not subject to any of the conditions that might cause her harm.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then the woman must be placed face down on a bed on her stomach, with her head inclined to one side and her thighs raised.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the minister should hold her in two parts or tie her to the bed so that her body does not move during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	Then you moisten the mouth of the womb with humid oils and with a poultice of alum, fenugreek, and its seeds.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	Then anoint the woman's hand with those oils and poultices, and then insert your hand easily into the womb, and then search with your hand for the place where you can grasp the fetus with your fingers.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And here is the translation of the provided sentence:
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	And if the discomfort is in the patient's feet, then it is in the ankles, or in the middle of the back.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And it is necessary that the instrument be held with the right hand, and place its curvature in the area between the fingers of the left hand, and insert the hand easily so as to place the instrument in one of those areas we have mentioned, until it reaches the swollen cause.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then place and keep another person in the appropriate position next to him, or a third if necessary, so that the traction is equal, and not just according to its straightness alone.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And it should be massaged all over, so that the swelling is reduced in the same way as when performing the extraction of a tooth.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And oil should be applied to it where necessary so that the extension is softened; and if any part of it is retained, then the midwife should anoint some of her fingers with oil and skillfully insert them and turn with them what is retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore, if part of the fetus is stuck, then the positions should be changed until it becomes easier; do this until the entire fetus is delivered.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if one hand is extended before the other and it is not possible to reduce it due to the constriction of the area, then a cloth should be wrapped around that hand; then extract it until all of it is delivered, and incise it either at the joint of the wrist or in the elbow.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And thus you must do the same on the other hand and on both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	And if the head of the boil is large, or you encounter constriction during exudation, or water is tightly sealed in the head, then you must insert between the fingers and split the head to drain the water, or you should scrape it with an instrument called “alundat,” the form of which will come with the forms of other instruments in the chapter that follows this one.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And similarly, if the boil has a large head by nature, then you must incise it with a scalpel, or take it out with an alundat as we have said; and then remove the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head has emerged but is constricted by the skin, then it should be split open so that the moisture within the foot can be released.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	But if it is not complicated and does not require exudation, then you should incise the head as soon as it is possible for you to do so.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the lower part of the abdomen is affected by an abscess or is dropsical, then you must perforate it so that the fluid within can be drained.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	If the condition affects the patient's feet, then the attraction of it is slight and the direction towards the mouth of the vein is mild.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	And if the abdomen and feet are constricted, then you must extract that with cloth which you will have wrapped around your hand, and you should cut open the abdomen and feet so that what is inside may flow out.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	And if the other limbs are stuck and the head turns back, then the midwife inserts her left hand; but if the mother's womb is closed, then she inserts her hand into the groin area, and with that hand seeks the head, and pulls it in with her fingers towards the mouth of the mother, and then inserts one ounce or two ounces into it, and pulls it out with those. 
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the wound is constricted by an abscess that has occurred at the site, then it should not be disturbed; first, you must administer a poultice of moist and fatty substances.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And administer plasters; and follow with baths that soften and moisten the patient.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the procedure is on the patient's side, then it should be punctured with a needle: and administer what we have said to the living wound.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if this is not possible, then it should be cut into pieces and extracted.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And it is necessary that you do not leave any cause inside the second layer.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed all of your procedure, then administer what we have said about the treatment on the abscesses that may occur from the operation.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if bleeding occurs, then immerse in styptic waters and administer the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have seen a woman whose belly contained a dead fetus, and soon after, she was pregnant again, and then another fetus died.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happened to someone after a long time that an abscess formed in their navel; and it swelled inside, then it was opened, and they began to discharge pus.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called to his care, and treated him for a long time, but the plague did not subside.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I placed several strongly adhesive plasters on him and drew out a bone from him, and after passing some days, I drew out another bone; and I was very amazed because there were no bones in his belly.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then I thought that they were the bones of a dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then I treated the plague, and extracted many bones from him, the woman existing in his very minute particles, and he lived in this manner for a long time, curing him of a small arm issue. 
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I do not mean to be strange, but rather because in this lies knowledge and help for what the physician skillfully administers with their hand for treatment.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of a forceps with which the womb is opened:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of a stretcher in which the ribs are joined, with two forceps at the two ends of two handles.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	However, this forceps must be more delicate than the stretcher and should be made either of iron or of ash wood.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the width of each handle should be two fingers, and the margin of each should be about one finger, and the length of each is one and a half palms; and in the middle of the two handles are two joints made from the same type of wood which are already fixed, each of which has a length of about half a palm plus a little more, and the width of each is two fingers or a little more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additions are inserted into the mouth of the mother so that it is opened with those when you revolve the two prescribed virtues.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	And however at the end of his two extensions thus as if often, and the length of those extensions is about one palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you wish to open the womb with those methods, then place the woman on the bed with her feet hanging down, and open what is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then open your hand with the instrument just as you would with scissors, cutting according to the amount you want of the opening of the mouth of the wound until the midwife does what she wants. 
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of dizziness which the ancients said:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran.
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is similar to forceps that have teeth at the end, just like pincers, and sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, just like pincers, which have teeth like those of a saw with which it is cut and scraped.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	It seems that the phrase "Forma de amesidat pauc" is in a language that blends elements of Latin and Romance languages. A close translation to English might be:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Forma de unci havent una spina:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Forma de unci havent doas spinas:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Form of forceps with which the teeth close in such a way that the head of the fetus is compressed:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Forma de dos espatums latz:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All those instruments are exercised, and the more their types are multiplied and prepared by the artisans, the lighter is the operation for them and better suited to people due to its quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not use those instruments at all; you should prepare yourself, for the necessity of those is not excusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	From the extraction of the stone. 
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second stage of labor is delayed, then you must command the patient to hold her breath, and then make her sneeze with powder, and press your hand over her mouth and nose, and if by this the expulsion happens, it is good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then take a bowl and pierce the lid with a hole and place on it herbs to burn near the mouth of the mother, such as calamus, rue, anise, chamomile, Arabic scammony, and cinnamon bark.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water in the pot, and place that over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	Then place a cane tube in the mouth of the container, and keep that inside so that the vapor comes to the concavity of the container.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	Then make her sneeze as we have said, and the second one will be expelled quickly.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	But if this treatment remains and is not expelled, then you command the midwife to submerge her left hand in olive oil or in marjoram ointment, and then insert that into the vagina and search with it for the second one, and when you have found it, then take it out little by little. But if it is attached to the wall of the uterus, then insert her hand as we have recommended, and when she has found the second one, extract it bit by bit according to the prescription so that the uterus does not suffer excessive traction.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Before anything is done, it must be moved to the right and left sides with ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And then adjust the amount of suction, for it will obey and withdraw from adherence.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the opening of the womb is narrowed, we have already recommended treatment with sneezing and with medication using herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	But if it is not expelled by all the causes we have recommended, then be careful not to exert too much effort in repeatedly attempting extraction. However, it must be that what has been emitted from him into the opening of the womb adheres to the thigh of the woman; then anoint that area with unguent and a four-part medicine, for this will cause it to ripen over a few days and become dissolved and expelled.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	However, when it ripens, the bad humor is raised to the head and the stomach, causing harm to the sick person; therefore, it is necessary to administer fumigations and appropriate treatments for this condition.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	However, some of the Ancients have prescribed fumigation with sulfur and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Here is the form of an instrument with which a woman is fumigated for the retention of menses and the second stage [of labor]:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It seems like the text you provided is a blend of languages similar to medieval Latin or an old form of Romance language. Based on this, I'll attempt to translate the given line:
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And place the narrow end in the ash and the wide end over the fire, and let the smoking agent be placed upon the embers of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And let that smoking agent be consumed inside, and repeat with another one.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	On the treatment of an unperforated infant's anus.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Some children are born with their anus unperforated, which is a fine and obstructed tube.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then it is necessary for the midwife to pierce that tube with her finger; and if not, pierce it with a sharp spatula, and be careful not to touch the bladder.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	Then place wool soaked in wine and oil over that area; then treat it with ointment until it heals.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	But if you fear it is obstructed, then insert a catheter into the tube for several days, and remove it when the child needs to defecate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And it may happen that the anus is obstructed due to the consolidation of a plaque or an abscess; in that case, it is necessary to incise that consolidation and then treat it with the methods we have mentioned for treatment and the use of lead.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	For the treatment of fistulas that occur in this area.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that appear in the lower part where there is pus are large and thick, which appear close to the anus externally or in the space of that area.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is a fistula or abscess. 
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that swelling is old and comes from moist white humidity or subtle putrefaction, and sometimes these fistulas penetrate deeply.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those penetrating are known by what is excreted from them through excretion and flatulence; and sometimes the patient suffers from excretion, and it is strongly expelled along with worms.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And some of those fistulas observed in the space penetrate into the bladder, and into the flesh of the penis; and some of them penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the buttocks.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And that which is known to distinguish a penetrating fistula from a non-penetrating one is that you insert your index finger into the anus and carefully introduce a slender probe of wax or iron into the fistula when there is no tortuosity.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	And if there is tortuosity in that area, then introduce a slender probe of lead or horsehair until you feel the probe or the hair with your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel anything at all and do not find any signs of obstruction or the presence of worms or air during the procedure, as we have said, then you know that it is non-penetrating, and then proceed with the treatment.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the urethra of the penis, then its significance is the leakage of urine from that area and the prohibition of it from allowing the site to be consolidated with medicine.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	And if it penetrates into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the area, then the sign is that the probe passes through there without tortuosity into the bone, causing pain in the region of the affected part; and that pus continuously flows from it; and that no treatment is effective there, nor can it be consolidated with ointment.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those fistulas penetrating it is not a complete cure, and the cure for those is the work and vanity of the young doctors on which they rely.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	But in those cases that are not penetrating and not old, healing with fire is hoped for according to what I will recount to you, and this which has already been tried. 
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back and lifts their legs towards you, with the thighs inclined towards their belly, and then insert a lead probe, or a reed if it is in the tortuous fistula, until you know the location where the probe reaches.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if the patient feels pain around the neck, now you must insert your index finger into the neck.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel in your finger the attempt already by itself to penetrate openly, or what you feel between your finger and that opening or flesh, then you know certainly that it is penetrating; and then do not work on that area, for it is not there where the healing lies, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But however some say it is healthy in some men's eyes.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And of the treatment by which improvement is hoped for, you should use a fine cautery according to the width of the fistula, as was previously mentioned, and introduce that heated instrument into the fistula until it reaches around the neck; then repeat this two or three times until you know that all the fistulized tissues that resemble feather quills are properly adhered.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	Then treat it with dressings wrapped in bandages until all the adhered tissues come out, and then treat it with medicines that generate and consolidate the flesh. If it is healed, that's good; if not, it will never be cured by any other treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if you insert a probe inside and it does not penetrate your finger which is in the anus, and between that finger and the probe there is a kind of flesh or fibrous tissue, and twist the fistula so that the surface of the cord faces upwards, then dry the cord from the beginning of the fistula, and use the probe to dry it inside the fistula until the drying reaches the point where the tip of the probe arrives, and through this process, the area is cleansed and cut.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then clean those fistulous flesh which resembles a bird feather tube and do not break any of them for any reason.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	If blood flow should come between you and your operation while you are dissecting those tissues, then the best thing to do and the lightest instrument is to cauterize with fire or with sharp medicine, for a cautery with fire has two good effects: it is the adjustment of those tissues being joined together, and the cutting off of blood by drying out the moistures.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	Then treat that area with cloths wrapped in bandages or finely ground herbs placed over the wound, and then heal the wound with unguents that generate and consolidate tough flesh.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And these medicines possess astringent and drying properties; when they are restored, the wound is healed and you need not fear recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	But if the fistula has already penetrated into the rectum and extends from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the rectum and investigate with it.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And thus if the probe encounters and there is only a veil of skin or flesh between you and it, and penetration is prevented, then it is not an operation on it but rather a matter of trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	Here is the translation of the provided medieval medical text line by line:
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the fistula is treated in this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it goes into the side of the buttocks around the surface of the body with the chain and at the margin of the buttocks, then take a probing extremity that is like a needle for preparing the cores according to this form:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	And insert into that area enveloped by five fingers or around it; then insert a finger into the fistula until you reach its cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	Here is the translation line by line:
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then treat the wound before it is consolidated and healed. 
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the opening of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate in whatever way you have prepared, but ensure that there is movement within the pus, for it is not up to you to do this so as not to cut into the tendon; and then proceed with that which needs to be healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The form of the spiked spatula with which the fistula is split: its curvature is sharp on one side and the other part is not sharp, so that you do not incise what is not necessary, thus as needed.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Of stitching hemorrhoids in which blood flows at the incision of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And of those that are small and large, and from which the blood flows constantly and is one, and with particles, and outside the anus, and in the extremities of it.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	And yet those that are related to the buttocks follow months of little moisture, during which yellow water or a bit of blood is continuously discharged, and this follows according to the color of the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the treatment for what is inside the anus is that you command the patient to sit and to squeeze themselves so that the anus opens and the hemorrhoids appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you take care and suspend them with hooks or hold them with your nails, and then cut those veins at their roots.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	If the nails are not held in place by moisture and softening of those areas, then take those with rough cloth or wool batting, extract them with your fingers, then cut into them and sprinkle certain powders over them near the incision so they serve instead of cautery; or cauterize them as is described in the chapter on cautery.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	Then treat those with other treatments until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the stool does not come out easily, then apply a clyster to the patient using one with a small nozzle, and wash it with the water from the colon that can facilitate a gentle evacuation when the patient is squeezed. 
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	If the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then their cause is superficial, and you should take them with your fingernail, or use a hook to grasp them, cut them, and then treat them with what we have said until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And for the incision that you will perform, you must proceed with suturing in this manner: take thread wrapped and insert it into a needle, then pull the hemorrhoids to the upper parts, and make the needle penetrate through the root of the other side. Wrap both ends of the thread at the part farthest from the needle laterally; tighten the hemorrhoid firmly with a strong hold, and then knot the thread and remove the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this to all of them, but leave one without stitching, so that the excess blood can flow out from it.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	Then place over the anus a cloth soaked in rose oil or ointment; put that over it and instruct the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then leave it in place until it dries; when it is dry, treat them with ointments or other treatments until they are healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	Of the treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	White spots occur due to drying of the wound or by natural constriction.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And when they are old and no longer useful for that medicine, then you must scrape those with the tip of a spatula or with your nail until they become moist and remove the pus that is on top, which prevents them from healing; then treat those until they have healed.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then you remove those with a more forceful scraping than the first until blood comes out and they are raw; then treat those until they are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Of the treatment of anal fistulas, this is crucial.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that alamermar, which is crucial, appears as round spots according to the color of the skin similar to the head of a carnation, and it occurs all over the body but mostly in the areas around the feet and hands, and sometimes it causes severe pain.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then it is necessary to incise what is around the area of the spot, hold it with forceps or tweezers, and remove it from its root; then treat that area.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you want, cauterize the wound that is described in the preceding chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	And a wart is a small, rough, tubular, round elevation on the surface of the body, and they often appear on the hands of children. 
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And the treatment of it is that you extend and incise that area, or that you probe inside with a thread or with hair to draw out what falls.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you want, cauterize that, as we have said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And already the hemorrhoids, both internal and external, have been removed with the instrument that I will describe.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	And a mays formica is a small, hairy or fistulous swelling on the surface of the body that moves slightly under the skin, and when cold reaches it, it causes pain similar to an ant bite, and it occurs around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And the treatment for it is to take a caneula (small tube) made from an eagle feather or a vulture feather, and let it be strong, and place that over the ant-like swelling so that it fits within the circle of the caneula; then rotate your hand with the caneula until you cut out what is inside the circumference of the swelling, and press it into the flesh to root out the ant-like swelling from its base.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, do this with a caneula (small tube) made of brass or iron according to this method:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Let the part above the caneula be tapered, closed (meaning not perforated), and covered so that when placed on the finger, its grip is secure and it can be rotated easily.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you want to cauterize the ant as was mentioned earlier in the chapter on cautery of the eyelid.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	Of the shape of the instruments that are used to give christeries (a term possibly referring to some medical or ceremonial procedure).
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Here is the translation of the provided text:
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of large and small chrysters:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the cannula above, which is tied to the bag, should be wide according to this manner; and it should be at a distance where the bag is tied just so. 
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the end part of the pus below, which is inserted into the buttocks, is closed (so it is not open) due to a lion-like swelling; and on one side there are two channels, and on the other side one channel, and the width of the channel should be according to the thickness of the rays, making it slightly thicker. 
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And let the bag in which the medicines are placed be made of animal bladder or sheepskin, and its mouth should be one palm wide.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And it should be pierced by thick threads in such a way as it is twisted; and if the space between the threads is as thick as a finger. 
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then you introduce into those tracts strong lye of fresh lye which is from ten eggs, or around those; and adjust with that the bag; and when the bag is placed on him, it should be tight at the head of the catheter between two distinct points with strong compression; and then catheterize each tract: However, the quality of catheterizing with that is to fill the bag with medicine which is warmed according to the quantity tolerated by the patient; and beware lest it be too hot or too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And then the patient should be placed on their back, and raise their legs up and place them on a cushion or a pillow; and then anoint the tip of the catheter with oil or egg white or fenugreek mucilage or similar substances; and then insert it into the anus easily; and then the practitioner takes the bag and squeezes it firmly, even forcefully, until everything in the catheter is evacuated into the intestine; and then remove the catheter and the patient raises their legs to the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine causes an expulsion, let it do so as much as possible; and if one sleeps with that for a whole night, it is better for recovery.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	And if you treat that person in the illnesses of diarrhea and the expulsion of gas pains, then you repeatedly apply the cautery until it is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if there are hemorrhoids or abscesses in the anus, then use a gentle and strong catheter, specifically a type of catheter with which children are usually catheterized.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Of the treatment of the plagues.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, I say that plagues are diversified according to how the plagues are caused and according to the location on which the plagues fall. 
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes by which many times plagues are caused are thus: casting of stones, or incision with a sword or knife, or percussion with a lance, or with clubs, or with arrows, or similar to those many causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I am recommending the treatment of some ailments for which you should pause that reasoning and apply these rules to other illnesses.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I begin with simple head ailments, for the recall of compound ailments will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore, when you encounter a simple ailment in the head that is not a fracture, consider this: if it is due to a blow from a stone or something similar and has already ruptured the vessel slightly but is a severe injury and you fear an abscess may develop, then you should be cautious and perform venesection of the cephalic vein immediately, do not delay; extract as much blood according to the severity of the condition unless there are prohibitive reasons for venesection, especially if the blood that has been discharged due to the injury is minimal.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And let the venesection be performed on the opposite side of the affected area; and protect the patient from drafts and from heavy foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if there is any contraindication due to the condition, then reduce the food intake and avoid meat and wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And place on the wound, if an abscess develops, a compress soaked in olive oil or in wine in which something styptic has been steeped.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	And if it is certain that the swelling is due to an abscess, then apply [the treatment] directly on the wound, if it is recent with its own blood and the air has not changed that powder which I will mention shortly.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed that condition, then place poultices over it until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	And if the wound is large or results from a sharp and similar instrument, and the edges of it cannot be brought together with pillows, then bring those edges together with sutures as I will describe regarding the suturing of them.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	But if the wound has already exposed the bone and sinew, and there is no retention of it but only a small suspensorium, then incise that area and subsequently treat the wound with medications and restore the flesh by applying them in a bandage-like manner. Command the patient to eat foods rich in nutrients: eggs and form a diet similar to these until it is composed (healed).
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find putrefaction in the wound that does not adhere to the bone, then you should incise all of that rotten part and remove it, and subsequently treat it.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	But if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which bleeding can occur and it cannot be stopped by medications, then you should probe the artery. If you find that it has not been cut, then you should incise it with a spatula, or tie it off; and if necessity arises such that what we have said does not suffice, then cauterize until the blood is stopped.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these sores are simple and small, then their cause is slight; in such a way that you powder over those this powder, which will solidify before the air changes them.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the method of the powder is as follows: take oil of vipers one part, dragon's blood two parts, fresh cow dung three parts; let it all be finely ground and sifted, and with that fill the wound, and press it firmly within so that it adheres well to that area, and let it clot with the blood. 
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And then press that area with pillows and leave it like that, and do not release it while it is thus, until the inflammation subsides, because the medicine within has not taken effect until it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes this alone is sufficient as treatment, when you do not have access to essence and dragon's blood in your presence.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this same procedure is performed during large swellings when it is necessary to place it over them and compress them, especially fresh swellings with their blood, which have not been altered by the air.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, especially during summer, then it is not appropriate to use this powder's application. Instead, treat them as we have said, by placing certain ointments on them, or by placing flour mixed with water and honey over them until they start to rot; then treat them with another method until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	But if the swelling is accompanied by a fracture in a bone, and it is small, then you should extract it with gestures (manipulations).
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I will describe the treatment of skull fractures in what is venomous or toxic.
De las plaguas del col.	From the afflictions of the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	But if the affliction affects the neck, there is no difference in treatment, and it is the same as a simple affliction of the head.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	But if the nerves or arteries of the neck are cut, then if it is a nerve, no treatment should be applied that causes strong astringency, such as zinc and vitriol, which adhere to the nerves and constrict them.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not apply any source of cold to the affliction, for the substance of the nerves is cold and their continuation is connected to the brain, which is the most sensitive part of all the members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it is treated with mild medicines, such as washing with warm water, sometimes infused in olive oil, whether boiled or unboiled, and thyme when washed with warm water, along with other similar small stones according to this method, and apply moist ointments.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the affliction is large, then administer stitching, or bring the edges together, and then treat it with poultices until it heals.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	And if there is depth to the wound or you encounter putrefaction in its lower part, then pierce it at the most depressed area.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	But if in the wound an artery is already cut and bleeding occurs, then separate or dry it out, ligate it, or cauterize it if the situation requires such action.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the vertebrae of the neck have already been cut through entirely and the veins of the neck are saved, then you should suture the edges of the wound over the bone of the neck without touching it; first align it and reduce it to its natural shape, then secure it with appropriate binding, and leave it for several days; then treat it with ointments that have astringent and stimulating properties until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	But if the wound has caused a fracture in the bone, then percuss it, and if there are fragments of bone in it, remove all that you can; leave what cannot be reached until the wound putrefies, and let it separate so that the swelling decreases.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the wound is recent, then sprinkle over it the powder that has been recommended.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	And if the wound has formed an ulcer, then treat it with the method which will be recalled in the subsequent chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Regarding wounds to the neck or similar injuries when inflicted between the shoulders, whether caused by a sword, knife, lance, or similar weapons.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a puncture from a lance or a sword, and you gauge the depth of the wound, then consider whether there is air coming out of the wound when the patient breathes; if so, know that the wound is mortal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is no deep penetration and the wound is fresh with its own blood, then you should apply powder to it within the first hour, but do not strain it so that the blood is retained in the depth of the wound and returns to the heart, worsening the patient's condition; instead, apply an attractive unguent to it, and wash it twice a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the unguent is not available, then you should apply a piece of cloth to the wound's opening to absorb the moisture that comes out; and have the patient lie in such a way that the wound is elevated so that what is inside can drain out.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	Here is the translation of the given text line by line into English:
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If the healing of it is avoided and has been open for a long time, then know that a fistula has formed; cure that accordingly by its chapter.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the wound is caused by a cut from a sword or knife, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or back, then treat it with suturing if it is large, or with powder if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	And if the bone has already fractured and the cut pieces are embedded in it, then you should twist the wound and attempt to extract those pieces, if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	But if they are not separated, then leave them inside so that the wound may heal, as their extraction would be difficult.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other wounds occurring in the other limbs, the treatment in healing is the same as what we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Regarding wounds of the abdomen.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The discomfort that occurs in the abdomen can be either severe, mild, or moderate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	In severe cases, you will find the intestine or nerves of the intestine involved, which requires a more forceful and precise intervention and suturing.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And a small dislocation is made difficult by another method, and it seems that their reduction is more difficult if you do not take care of the introduction of them to their place immediately, because once opened and thickened, the entry becomes difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And thus the best disruption is moderate, for in that case the reduction of the hernia is not difficult, just as it is difficult in the two previously mentioned types.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And know that stitching of the abdomen is done in four ways, but two methods of stitching are common and apply to wounds in other parts of the body as well.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other specific methods of stitching relate to wounds in other parts of the body, but they are more specifically used for stitching the abdomen.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I recommend to you each one with explanation and clarification.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Thus, I say that when the wound is small and a part of the intestine protrudes through it, and it is difficult to reduce it, this can happen in one of two ways: either due to the small size of the tear as we have said, or when the intestine has become inflamed due to the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And when this is the case, then you must treat it in such a way that you soak a sponge or cloth in warm water alone, or boil water with squill, cyperus, and nutmeg, and apply it to the intestine until the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And sometimes it is better to use a solution that has astringent properties, which is more effective than plain water in reducing the inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And when you see the inflammation resolved, then you moisten the area with water in which elder and mallows have been boiled, for this alleviates the internal part with little harm.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	And if it is necessary to use the instrument for this treatment, then cut the incision slightly with an instrument with which you can perform hemorrhoidectomies.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first treatment is better when it is appropriate that there be no drying, and not to engage in drying near necessity and deficiency.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, here is its form:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of the sharp wound, and the other part not-sharp, and the extremity subtle, and not be like the subtlety of a spatula, rather be slightly blunt.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And when the swelling has increased and you have removed the intestine, then it must be reduced according to its natural form, in its proper place, if that is possible, for that is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	And when the disruption is large and it is in the lower part of the abdomen, then you must have the patient lie on their back, and raise their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then you raise the head and feet higher than the other parts.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then always keep your attention and consideration focused on this so that the part where the swelling is becomes higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus you must administer this in large swellings and in moderate swellings as well.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in small swellings, apply what you have prepared, then have the assistant place their hand over the swelling and bring the edges together, then suture it carefully from one end to the other.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common method of suturing: first take a needle, or a count of needles according to the amount of the width of the wound; then leave at the extremity of the disruption of the ring finger, and hold the needle tightly once, so that you do not put thread in both ends of the chain, with both ends of the suture which is left in the middle of the separated parts, between what you make penetrate from one part; and you have already added both ends of the chain and both ends of the suture, and thus four rows are made. 
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And then strengthen around the area with double glue where the needle goes, and sometimes on both sides at once, and then bring together the two lips and the wound by a proper joining; and then leave the thickness of the finger and insert another needle into that area, and then tie it with glue as you did with the first needle; and do not stop doing this if necessary until you have completed the entire constriction of the wound.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And let the needles be of moderate thickness between thick and fine, for the finer needles lightly penetrate the flesh; and the thicker ones are difficult to insert into the wound, and therefore it is necessary that they be of moderate thickness between fineness and thickness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And it is not necessary that the needle be inserted at both ends of the wound immediately, so that the flesh is not lightly cut and the wound may heal before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And let the sutures not be prolonged so that the wound is not prevented from consolidating.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then sharpen the ends of the needles so that they do not irritate the patient during their sleep; and place on the sutures powders spread from all parts, which hold the ends of the needles; and leave them until you know that the wound is already consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And these types of stitching with needles in this manner are more suitable for small wounds, where only one or two needles suffice for the stitching or around those areas.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And then when you have penetrated these four extremities with the needle, withdraw the needle from that same part where you started, so that the thread pulls out all of the pus from the deepest part to the surface, so that the suture is like sewing cloth with threads that are tightly drawn.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And pause between each suture the width of the smallest finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this suture is known to men. 
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And with such a suturing, I sewed the wound which had befallen a man in his abdomen who was struck by a knife; and it was a disruption of the wound greater than one palm, and it extended around two palms from the center area involving the intestines; and there was a disruption at the center of the member; and then I returned the intestine to its place after it had been out of the wound for twenty-four hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound was healed within about fifteen days, and I treated it until it was cured; and after that, he lived for many years, and his condition improved.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And the other doctors had judged that he could not be cured; and yet, he was healed by a miracle, for I did not treat him with ointment, as there was no place to find any ointment or medicine. Instead, I placed on the wound a piece of old cloth twice a day and washed it frequently with honey water until it was healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	But I will describe two specific types of suturing according to the narration of Paraula.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And it is that you begin with chain stitching, and insert the needle from the outer part to the inner part.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And so when the needle penetrates into the tendon and in that manner goes straight and along the length of the entire body, and leaves the tip of the syringe in which you have inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate from inside to outside at the other end of the wound.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And when you have made that penetration, then penetrate again in the same extremity of the membrane from the outer part to the inner part; and leave the extremity of the needle that is on this side, and penetrate the needle into the other extremity from the inner part to the outer part.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And penetrate with that the same way you made the penetration with the needle into the extremity of the membrane which is on the inner side so that all of it penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	Then begin from this side and sew it with the extremity of the needle on the other side, and withdraw the needle from the suture that you have penetrated, then return it to that suture and sew the extremity of the needle on the other side with this extremity of the membrane; and remove it from the suture that is on the other side.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this once and then again, doing it one time after another until you sew everything on the outside according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the essence of this method of suturing is that you sew with a skin suture with which I sew the skins, in such a way that you sew the needle once from one end of the suture, and leave it for a moment until you complete it. 
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	Here is the translation line by line:
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And then rotate those joints, and make each part inside penetrate into the outer part at both ends of the limb except where it is on the opposite side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this method of stitching is better than the common superficial sewing, and it is a type of stitching that leads to better healing.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This line translates to:
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And more so, they will tell you this: the abdominal suture is corrected with two needles, so that you insert a thread into each one of them, and begin by inserting the needle from your side, and make it penetrate through to the other layer according to the suturing method which sews the hearts equally. 
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And know that when a disruption is in the middle part of the abdomen, then缝合它比腹部其他部位的缝合要困难得多。 
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	But the treatment of plague medicine is a judgment of other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The sentence provided seems to describe a medical procedure for dealing with an ailment or wound. Here's the translation into English:
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the wound, then apply ointments over that area which you have at your disposal before they turn into hard stone and release bile, and be cautious and observant; then treat it in the same way as other wounds until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	And if you do not have the medicines at your disposal, then apply something over that area immediately, as it begins to emit pus and turn old, and change this twice a day, just as you are taught, until it is healed, for you should not require other medication in many conditions when the wounds are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	But if you fear that the wound may spread to the main limbs, then you must soak lion's wool in high-quality tempered oil or in anointed oil, and apply it around the areas between the joints and leave them like that.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if there is pain or putrefaction in the intestines, as this often occurs, then treat it with styptic black tea, and especially so if the rot has spread into the intestine and has penetrated into its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that the one that is of the large intestine has a quicker healing than the one that is in the small intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is of difficult healing because the intestine which is called "gegunu" does not receive healing from any plague that affects it entirely; and this is due to the great number of veins within it, the size of those veins, the subtlety of its structure, and its proximity in nature to nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	And if what you process from the plague is the membrane, and you obtain it recently, reduce it according to your prescription with which you treat the intestines equally.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	But if it has passed into the space and is already turned green or black, then when you apply traction to that area with a thread over the part that is discolored, so that blood flows out, because in the membrane there are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then incise what is another ligament, and place the two ends of the thread hanging from the diseased area, so that you may relieve the traction on it by lifting the membrane and releasing the arm of the disease.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembrance of the plagues when they occurred in the intestine.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When there is a small disruption in the intestine, it can be restored in some people. For this reason, I saw someone who had been wounded in their abdomen by a lance strike and the wound was on the right side of the stomach; the wound was old and had turned into a fistula, and because of this, there were discharges and gas.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then I considered the treatment of him already since he was not confident in his recovery, but stopped complicating that which heat had healed and the area was consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And I also must see the area already stabilized, and worry about the patient that they may fall into an unfortunate incident in their abdomen; and they do not suffer from any such misfortune, and continue with their various arrangements eating and drinking, and then bathe and exercise as directed.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And already some experienced ones have said that when there is a small wound on the intestine, then it must be tied in this manner: you take large-headed ants; and then adjust the two lips of the wound and place one ant from those with their mouths open over the two lips of the wound; thus when they grip onto those and tighten their mouths, cut off its head, because it adheres and does not dissolve.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And then place another ant next to the first one, and do not stop doing this with ants placed one next to the other according to the quantity of the entire wound.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And then close the wound and sew it up; let those heads remain attached inside the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not cause any harm to the patient.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestine be sewn with fine thread made from the intestines of an animal attached to it, since it is finer than a needle; you take the end of this intestinal thread, which should be stripped of any flesh, and then tie the end of the thread with another piece of thread wrapped around it, and then insert that thread into needles and sew the intestine with it, and return it to its place in the disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this method of缝合使用蚂蚁不过是基于信任和希望的次要方式。
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the wound is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the delicate intestines, because then it is not a simple injury but perforation, and it does not heal completely.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	On the treatment of gout and fistula.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that any wound or abscess when it festers and becomes old, and turns into an ulcer, and does not heal but continues to discharge pus constantly without being separated, then, in whatever limb it may be, it is generally called a fistula, and we call it by that name azukem.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And a fistula, in truth, is a hardened, furry nodule, white, with which there is no pain, and which has a cavity like the hollow of a bird's bone; and for this reason, we call it alcus rizatz, that is, a bone hollow.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And in some people, there is moisture that discharges pus; and quickly, this moisture is separated within a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And sometimes this moisture is gritty, and it is scanty, and it is thick, and it is fine.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already said in the division, when I discuss wounds, that any ulcer which does not heal or is not on bare flesh, is so for one of these reasons: some are due to a lack of blood in the body; or because of malice (evil nature) in it; or because there is hard flesh between it and the lips preventing new flesh from growing; or because it contains light debris; or because that ulcer itself is putrid, and the material inside is of poor quality; or because the medicine used for its treatment is unsuitable; when corruption falls upon the region, and there is pestilence; or due to the nature of the area as in Saragossa where disease digestion is difficult, and naturally the healing of abscesses is delayed; or because it contains bone or multiple bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	And all those causes have been shown, along with their signs and the treatment using medicines in this section.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And it is also necessary for me to make you understand the treatment of a fistula, which is performed through surgical operation by hand.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And know that a fistula can occur in all parts of the body; some of these fistulas affect large veins and arteries, or nerves, or the spine, or the intestines, or the bladder, or one of the ribs, or one of the vertebrae of the back, or one of the compound joints such as those of the hand and foot; and there are those that extend to the proximity of the main part of the limb and similar areas.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And thus, of these fistulas that are treated according to this method, they are among the diseases difficult to heal, and do not receive cure, and ignorance is involved in their treatment. 
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if there are some fistulas whose depth does not reach the places I have mentioned, and you hope for and trust in their healing, and wish to gain knowledge of them, then take a probe of iron or bronze, and if the fistula goes straight, explore it with that.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	And if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a thin lead probe, for lead, due to the lightness of its body, is flexible and curves according to the twist.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula contains horrifying growths, it is not possible for you to probe it with a probe.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then irrigate the openings through their own openings, for the moisture with which you irrigate it will follow the other openings and flow out from them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	Then inquire thoroughly in whatever way is possible for you to know if there are bones or nerves here, and whether the depth of the fistula is deep or shallow, or if it is a fistula with multiple openings that extends over all this. Do so with all your strength through your examination, by which you examine the patient, and let your compression with your hand on the area reveal the source of the pain, along with signs and accidental causes related to the abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And after you have stood over all those causes with true observation, then proceed to the treatment according to confidence: that is, consider now whether it is an apparent fistula near or in a salty place, deep from a joint, or from a nerve, or from an artery, or from a vein, or from one of the places which you have seen and noted.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Here is the translation of the given line:
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	And if the fistula is of great depth and runs straight, then you must incise that as much as possible according to your ability; then clean it from all its corrupted flesh; then administer cloths wrapped in sharp medicines, and insert them into the cavity of the fistula, which you have probed with an iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do this several times until the sharp medicine corrodes all that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula from the corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	Then restore it with ointments that will generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	And if it is not healed by this method, then you must cauterize it as we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the cause of the fistula is bone and you must be certain of this, then you should investigate it and dry it out as we have recommended, unless you find any cause involving a vein or nerve or main member, as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	And if the bone is exposed and there is some corruption and blackening in it, then you must scrape that area until all the corruption is stopped; then treat it with something that will cause flesh to grow until it is healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not healed and cut arm as it should be, then know that you have not reached the complete eradication of the corruption; and then you uncover again and carefully examine it and cleanse it with your final strong treatment, and then restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And thus if it is healed, good; and if not, then you know that that corruption is in the deep recesses of the body, which has not been reached, and then there is nothing for you to do but to abandon that.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is within your ability to pull it out, then you should pull it out with delicate forceps that are suited for this purpose.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there are many bones, then carefully extract all of them, and do not leave any behind due to any cause with your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if any cause of moisture hinders you, and at the beginning there is neither fear nor error, then incise those ligaments or flesh if they are present, and free the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	But if it is not the time to set the bones, then apply something to the wound that can help heal the wound, and leave that within the area around those bones with flesh and ligaments, and guard the wound so that it does not close prematurely, and ensure that the section you have incised in your operation remains open.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	However, if you fear, apply to the wound something sprinkled with oil, or a dressing immersed in Egyptian ointment, or in one of the green ointments, for when those ligaments will decay and the bones are separated from them by ablation, the traction is alleviated.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	But if what is corrupted of him is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the bone marrow, then it is necessary to close that area by cutting inside where the corruption has spread, and then treat so that it becomes consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend to you what happens to a man in his thigh so that you may use this as an example and assistance for your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	There was a young man, about thirty years old, to whom pain occurred in his thigh. And from the parts inside, corrupted matter spread within the body until it reached the thigh. This matter is pus with a large abscess, and there was no external cause for it.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then it extended over time due to the error of the doctors until the abscess was opened, and pus began to discharge from it. His recovery was almost halted until his chest became fistulated, and multiple openings were made in him through which all discharged pus and the moisture of the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then he was treated by many doctors for around two years, but there was no knowledge or skill in the art until I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And you see the chest of him and the materials that were flowing from those orifices because of great corruption; and already the body of that man was entirely corrupted and the color of it was yellowish.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I inserted the probe into one of those orifices and brought the probe to the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then I carefully examined all the orifices and found those that lead to it from all parts of the chest.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I prepared and incised one of those orifices where I discovered a part of the bone, and found it corrupted; it was already brittle, corrupted, and discolored; and a part of the chest that had penetrated into the marrow was already corrupted.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I treated what was discovered and prepared of the exposed bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I ensured that only the corruption in the bone was cut out and treated, which I had already identified.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then I applied the restoration of the wound with consolidating medicine for a long time, and it was not consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then I repeated the procedure and exposed the bone again over the initial exposure, and found continued corruption with the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And search for what appears to me from that corruption, and then I was pierced in performing the cure and restoration of it, and it is not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I uncover it on the other side and do not cease to cut the small bone bit by bit particularly and perforate its restoration, and it is not restored until I cut around about a palm of it, and that which is extracted with its marrow, and then restore it with medicines, and it is slightly consolidated and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And iteration in the operation and section of it is not necessary except due to the disposition of its weakness and the lack of tolerance and fear of death, for accidents occur at all times due to excess evacuation leading to fainting.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And thus it is entirely healed, and where there was bone, now there is hard flesh; and its disposition is made good in its body, and the strength returns to it; and it is converted in its dispositions, and no contradiction occurs during movement nor any harm in any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	However, if there is a prominent bone in an already injured part of the body, then you must cut it according to this method: take a ligament and tighten it at the end of the protruding bone, and command someone to pull on it; then use a thicker woolen bandage than the first one; bind that over the flesh below the bone, and stretch its extremity so as to draw the flesh apart; and uncover the flesh where you wish to cut so that the saw does not touch the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And place a stick or board under the bone properly, for when you do this, it is not forbidden to saw where it does not touch the corrupted flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And it is necessary that the binding be applied gradually to the corrupted area, because if corruption is within the concavity of the bone and does not appear on its surface to the senses, and forces another application of the binding.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, before it was one part connected to the other, and the corruption is at the middle or in a part of it, then you uncover the flesh from all sides completely; and then place wood underneath, and then bind that first part where the corruption is until the binding of the other part is continuous.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And apply the ligature according to the location of the corruption a little, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and bind the bone where it continues from the other side.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuation between two joints, then it is not reasonable to save it but rather to remove it.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; however, you must investigate how the corruption appears to you, and incise that area, and clean it according to whatever method is possible for you, and amputate correctly when it does not interfere with any veins or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And know which are the incisors and the saws used to cut these bones are very specific according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of those, and the thickness of those, and the fineness and the size and the smallness of those, and the hardness and their rarity; therefore, you must prepare every kind of tool suitable for that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And know that this operation signifies to you the type of instrument you need; when you have great study and long experience in the methods of this art, and knowledge of disease methods, for which now you apply what is appropriate from among all instruments to any illness.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And I am giving you at the end of this chapter the list of instruments which you will use simply with which you will proceed in your procedure which you will perform on others.
Forma de serra:	Forma de serra:
Forma de autra serra:	Forma de autra serra:
Forma de autra serra:	Forma de autra serra:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Forma de autra serra gran:
Forma de ray:	Forma de ray:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	Make the head of this rod in the shape of a star-headed nail, and the points on it should be according to the form of staggered points.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it is not appropriate to apply friction only to the ends of the joints when they are corrupted, or if the opening is very wide.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Form of a larger razor than the others:
Forma de razori menor:	Form of a smaller razor:
Forma de razori lat:	Form of a broad razor:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Form of another properly made saw: it should be made with an arch on the upper part and the sharpness on the iron side, and the handle made from wood should be properly constructed.
Forma de lu:	Form of it:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Form of a razor that has a concavity:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Form of another delicate razor:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Form of another razor with a curved end:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Form of instruments with which bones are cut:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Forma de inscisori autra minor:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Form of another incision tool; this resembling a ray, and the end of it is like a saw, and it is applied in various places along the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And the extremity of it is triangular and has a sharp end. 
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly, all the causes we have mentioned for razors, scissors, and saws apply.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of the incision of extremities and the suturing of bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	Extremities may swell either due to intrinsic causes or extrinsic causes. If you have treated that corruption with medicines for cure and the cure does not succeed, or if the corruption spreads to the member without any apparent cause, then you must incise that member where the corruption touches it, so that the patient may be saved from death or severe illness which is a greater evil than the loss of the limb.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of the one to whom this happens is that the member turns black before it dries up, as if fire had already consumed it, or it swells with blackness before that swelling corruption spreads through that member and takes over the entire body; therefore, be quick to incise that area.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	Similarly, if the corruption is caused by some venomous creatures such as marine scorpions, vipers, or rattlesnakes, and the like.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or swelling is in the extremity of the finger, then you must incise the finger and do not give space for the corruption to spread into the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly if you access the hand, then you incise that part at the base of the finger, and do not give space for corruption to enter into the forearm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if you need to do that, then cut the arm between the elbow and the joint. 
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if the corruption passes further and surrounds the knee, then in that case it is the death of the patient; and administering another cause other than this in treatment is a measure of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly treat the foot when corruption overtakes the toe of the foot, then you incise it between one of the joints.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if you take hold of the sole of the foot, then you cut through the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	And if it enters into the knee, then you cut through the thigh between the joint of the knee.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already spread above the knee, then there is no remedy for it but dismissal, and leave the patient to death.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the method of amputating or cauterizing the limb is that you tighten a ligature at the part just below where you want to cut, and place another ligature above the area; extend an assistant's ligature on both sides below, and have another assistant extend a ligature above; then separate the flesh between the two ligatures with a spatula until all the flesh is exposed; then proceed to cut or cauterize.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And it is necessary to place cloth on all sides so that the area does not come into contact with dirt, and that the patient receives a properly adjusted dressing and a cauterized abscess.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	But if blood flows while you are operating, then you cauterize the area properly, or place on it some powder to staunch the blood; and then return to your treatment until it is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then apply the injured limb with a bandage appropriately, and treat it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I remind you of what happened to a man in his foot, this accident which I and you have recounted, which is that an accident caused blackening in his foot due to burning that was similar to combustion by fire.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that accidental corruption first occurred in his toe and then spread to the entire foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepared himself for various pus to come out as part of the treatment by applying force to the limb because of the intensity of the pain and burning he experienced, and he cut that foot up to the joint, and fire [cauterization] healed it.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	And then that same corruption occurred in the index finger of his hand for a long time.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then he came to me, and so I performed the task of removing that excess by placing various medicines on his hand for the purification of his body; but when the excess did not subside, it began to spread to another finger and then throughout the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And the apelec led me to incise his hand, and I did not want to do so, hoping against the reaction of that excess, and more because I feared the incision of his dead hand, for the strength of the patient was in seizure.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And after he was freed from me, he returned to his land and it came to my knowledge that this man prepared and cut his entire hand, and was healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have added this narration only to be helpful regarding what one should do about this disease, and for its meaning by which it should be understood and according to which it should be treated.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	On the treatment of the sinuses and the quality of enemas with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess occurs in certain fleshy members and the space of the abscess is prolonged until pus collects, and then it bursts and perforates, and the pus comes out of it, leaving the place empty as if it were a vessel, and the skin that covers it looks like fine cloth, and there has been no corruption reaching behind, nor does it imprint on the bone or in nerves or tendons, it is called a sinus, and it is not named a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	However, if the space is prolonged to the point where corruption penetrates some member, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the treatment of it is to incise that skin entirely as it has formed, especially when it has become thin and resembles cloth, and ensure that it does not adhere to the area due to its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	However, if you hope that the skin will adhere and that the corruption has not reached behind with further consequence, and if there is a passage through the skin, then you should treat it with aclyster (enema).
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And you consider the sinus, and when it is large, and the arm that you use should be of an offensive odor, then enema it with an Egyptian medicine which consists of equal parts of olive oil, sweet wine, and zingiber (ginger), and they are mixed in a vessel, and heated over fire until the medicine becomes warm and reaches the consistency of honey.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	Then take the necessary amount of it and dissolve it in water and honey; and use that to perform an enema on the sinus, strengthen its openings, and leave the medicine inside for a quantity of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	Then extract it with a scraper; do this for several days until the sinus is cleansed and the pus is completely removed.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And sometimes it is enema-ed with ashes water when this medicine is not available to you; and you should take the ashes of vines, put them in water; then strain that and use it to perform an enema until you are convinced that the sinus is now clean.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the ashes water, then enema it with a mixture of water and honey, in which ground ginger is also mixed, and enema it with a mixture of wine and honey, for the property of honey is to cleanse and wash, and the wine makes the sinus adhere more, especially when the wine has an excess of astringency and dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you do this several times and are convinced that the sinus is already cleansed, then cleanse it with something that promotes flesh growth.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And it is that you take ointment of diaphoretic and dissolve it with rose oil and styptic wine; or you administer aclyster with some medicines and apply other ointments that have the properties I have already written about in the treatise on ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the sinus orifice is narrow in which the syringe of the clyster cannot be received, then you gradually enlarge it with a small iron instrument, and apply linen cloth wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it has been enlarged.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And similarly, if the orifice is too wide, then you should sew up the edges of it with stitches, leaving enough space for the clyster to enter additionally.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the orifice from which the fluid flows is raised towards the upper parts, then dry it at the lowest point where the fluid can flow down, so that the fluid runs inside; for when the fluid is constricted in the depth of the sinus, the flesh is generated within.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinus around the lowest part of the bone as you wish, then you must prepare the member with a treatment that allows the fluid to flow out easily according to what is available to you and ensure that no cause for retention of the fluid remains within.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidating medicines that should be placed on the sinus, appropriate for your purpose, and extend them over a linen cloth.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the cloth should be of such quantity as to cover all of the sinus; and then incise with the scissors in the center of the sinus opening, making the cut slightly wider than the sinus opening; and then stretch another cloth over one of the linen strips according to the width of the cut, and place it over at a distance from the sinus opening so that the discharge from the arm does not soak the large cloth but rather change it every few days once.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	And the one that is over the sinus opening should be changed frequently so that it absorbs what comes out from the arm.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And to determine whether what flows from the arm is too much or little, or if it is well-digested or not-digested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And with this, you should consider the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if there is an abscess in it.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And as your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see the material that is placed over the sinus opening has already adhered or is about to adhere, then change it every third day. When you remove the dressing, change the cloth to a new one and renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	But if there is a subtle virus near the sinus space, do not despair about its adhesion, for its healing approaches, because there are some people in whom the generation of flesh in their wounds takes time, and there are others in whom the opposite occurs.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if for many days near the sinus space undigested matter remains, then know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and becomes a prolonged cause, then you should adjust with the drying of medicines, and if the medicines are moist in their substance and virtue, they should be dried like diafinicon when it is adjusted for the excess addition of moisture.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the most recent method used for treatment is to take diafinicon ointment and dissolve it in rose oil, and apply it over the area previously treated with an ointment similar in substance, then warm that area, and use this method.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And it seems appropriate in that action, when there is no undigested matter, to take diafinicon ointment and honey which is boiled until it is thickened, and use it; or take myrrh, aloes, and gall, grind all of them together, and sprinkle the powder over the honey while it is on the fire, then line that over cloth and apply it to the sinus; or line it with the honey you have cooked until it is thickened, sprinkle over the cloth, and apply that.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And at times it is administered with long aristologia and roots of celestial lilies (and those are indeed celestial lilies) and flour of hares and centaury, and use these simples or mixtures, crush them and sift them and sprinkle over the honey which has been diluted; and consume that.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the sinus is prolonged and not healed by this treatment, then you know that the corruption is in the pneuma of it, and already make an investigation into the bones or other hard members or the ligaments; then cure it with fistular treatment, as was said above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	On the treatment of whitlow and inflamed nails, and the addition of finger incisions and amputation.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Whitlow is an abscess that arises under the nail of the fingers or toes, and it can occur on other fingers as well. As it prolongs and its treatment is neglected, either another abscess forms next to it, or it becomes corrupted, causing pus to seep in and corrode the root of the nail. It corrupts the entire area, and through this corruption, it spreads to the bone, giving off a foul odor. The extremity of the finger becomes swollen, and its color turns dark.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And therefore when you have that area as we have said in the division and do not agree with your treatment, then it is necessary to incise with iron all the excess that remains of the nail and then cauterize the wound there, for a hot cautery is beneficial in this case.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is sick but the nail is healthy, and the edges of the nail are already pressing into the flesh on the inside parts, and start to pierce and irritate it, then you must place a thin splinter under the corner of the nail that is piercing the flesh, and push that part up; then cut that flesh with ease. Place something over what remains of the flesh using caustic corrosive medicines until it is completely eaten away; then treat that area with ointments until it heals.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	But if the corruption has already penetrated into the bone, then you must cut into that bone and extract it, for it will never heal as long as the corrupted bone remains inside.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the corrosion and corruption spread to the finger, then you should cut it at one of the joints where its removal is necessary, and then treat that area until it heals.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	But if the nail suffers from impact or friction and experiences severe pain, then at the beginning you should perform bloodletting on the patient. Then dry the nail with a sharp spatula using a transverse section from top to bottom, and be careful that the cut does not reach into the flesh beneath the nail, for this will cause intense pain to the patient and may lead to excessive growth of skin around the area. Then treat that area with something that alleviates pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	And regarding the properly adjusted one, which is born in the flesh of many men, it is very fleshy overall, and very strong in the bones, or very prominent in the nails.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some of them are born at the edge of the joint, or its origin is in certain nodes of the said area.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	And he who is born with some knots of the said kind does not suffer, but he who is born with strong joints in them is afflicted.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those that are born fleshy, the section is light, and it is such that you should incise that one from its root with a spatula.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	But for that which is born at the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; therefore, beware of amputating it.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But in one where it is born between the toes, you must incise the flesh at the beginning with a round incision inside the bone, then cut it with one of those suitable saws, and then care for what is inside so that it heals.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	But for consolidation which occurs between the toes due to intermittent swelling or by nature of the person being born with it, or by consolidation from a plague or by burning from fire, or by similarity, then you must dry that consolidation until the toes return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	Then place between the cloths that are soaked in oiled wax so that they are not lightly consolidated, and separate them, or place between them a thin sheet of lead until it is consolidated as required.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly, if consolidation occurs in the fingers with the palm, then dry that consolidation according to how it is prepared and suits the shape of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	From the description of vices, these are varicose veins.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Therefore, it is necessary that you administer purgation from black bile several times with strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	And the treatment of their inflammation is according to two ways: one is that it be incised and that black blood be drawn out, and the other way is that the vein be raised and all of it be extracted.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The section of it is according to this method: foment the beginning of the thigh with warm water until the thick blood is dissolved, which is the feculent matter of the thigh, and then bind the patient's thigh at its highest part above the knee with a bandage, and then dry the vein in one place, or two, or three places with a wide incision, and then draw out the black blood with your hand from below the thigh upwards, until the quantity of blood that you desire and which is sufficient has been released, and which the patient's strength can tolerate.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	Then give her that, and command them to abstain from foods that generate black bile.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And repeat the treatment by phlebotomy when the veins are full and inform the patient of this.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	And the elevation of them is according to this method: you shave the thigh of the patient, removing any hair, and then bathe the thigh with warm water until it reddens and the veins are prominent; or if a bath is not available, exercise the patient vigorously until the limb is warmed.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then dry the chain along the vein by drying it lengthwise or at the back where you find the heel, or at the lowest part where you find the ankle.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then apply the chain with hooks and squeeze the vein from all sides until it appears to the touch, and you must appreciate the change in color of that area as it tends towards blackness.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And thus when you release and from the chain you take that white thing which is a string.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then you place that limb into an elevated and secured position from the chain, and suspend it with one ounce of a lion's fat.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then make another incision near that incision for three fingers, and then apply pressure to the vein above where it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then elevate that and incise it at the back section below the talus, and then extract that and elevate it until it is exposed by the second incision, and then extract that from the section above it.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do this until you extract that from the incision which is the most superior or highest of all the incisions, until it is all exposed; and then incise that.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you cannot extract and elevate it, then insert a needle with a strong double thread and tie that and pull it out, or insert the needle again and rotate your hand in all directions until it is loosened.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And be careful that it is not cut; for if it is broken, it will be difficult for you to elevate it, and harm will come to the patient because of that damage.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And once you have completely removed it, then place on the wound area wool soaked in wine and anointed oil and unanointed oil, and treat that until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vein is contracted with tortuosity in which its coils are spread through sections, and it is not straight as we have said, then you must cut along that vein throughout all parts of its tortuosity and at the points where it coils, and then suspend it with hooks until you lift it completely.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And be careful with your incision so that you do not pierce the vein and do not damage it, for it will be difficult for you to lift it; use your judgment in this matter.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The method of incision with which the vein is cut:
Forma de unci orp:	Form of a hook instrument:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not sharpened like hooks are, nor does it have a sharp end so that it does not damage the vein; it is of thick and flexible construction, for if it were too fine, it would cut the vein with its fineness; however, excessive thickness is also unnecessary as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	On the extraction of the vein from the leg.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the thighs in cold regions, such as in al-Ateeq in the Arabian lands and in the cold and dry lands of India with little moisture, where there is no grass or trees.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And often it is generated in other parts of the body besides the lungs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And the gestation of it is putrefaction that comes from the chain, just as serpents and worms and maggots and worms are generated between the chain and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of the susceptibility to the occurrence of it is this vein where you encounter strong inflammation in the chest; then the area becomes blistered; and then the vein begins to emerge from the site of that blistering which resembles a plant rash.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then when the extremity appears, you must wrap around it a piece of lead whose weight is one dram, inside two drams, and fix that and leave the lead suspended from the bed.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And as many times as you find any cause outside of the parts, wrap that in lead and seal it.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the wound is prolonged, then you cut away a part of it and wrap up the remainder; and do not cut that which has been drawn inside until it comes out, for if you cut that which is contracted, it goes into the flesh and causes abscess and putrefaction in the area and a bad ulceration.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	Because it is necessary that it be treated carefully and extracted little by little until it is completely removed from the wound, so that no trace of it remains in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein, it extends in some men to the length of five palms and ten, and I have even heard of one that was twenty palms long.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is cut during its treatment, then insert the needle into the track of it and pierce that along the length with the core until all that is in the material is evacuated, and apply putrefaction to the area for several days with medicines; then treat that according to the treatment for abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein sometimes has branches, especially when it reaches the joint of the foot or in the foot, and comes to it with multiple openings, and branches out from each opening.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And thus treat that as we have said in the division and with what has been said above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	About the section on worms generated under the skin and it is called bovine disease.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is named in some regions as bovine disease because small white spots appear on the buttocks, and it is a worm that is born between the skin and the flesh. It moves throughout the body, going up and down, and its presence is felt as it travels from one member to another until it breaks through the skin and comes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its generation is due to the putrefaction of certain humors, just as worms, serpents, and worms like roundworms and ascarids are generated in the stomach.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared for its malice, because when it enters the body and rises to the head, reaching the eye, it then strongly affects it, entering and destroying the eye, which results in white spots.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And thus when you want to treat and extract it, it cannot be done unless its movement and appearance are felt. Then you must tightly bind what is above and below it with a strong ligature and constriction, and then dry it out and extract it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is embedded in the flesh and you do not find it, then place a heated cautery over the area where it lies, and the greatest concern is corruption of the wound, which can corrupt the area as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	If you see that it has reached close to the eye socket, then press strongly on the eyebrow with a firm grip, and then dry it out, and extract it; and the patient must use purifying treatments for their body with medicines that evacuate bad putrid humors, and they should avoid foods that generate putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	Regarding the treatment for nausea.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is called nafir in our land, and it is a pain that comes to some members, and then moves from one member to another.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And I have already seen that second thing which I am about to recount.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was called to a sick woman in a village, and I uncovered her arm and saw a small swelling in the vein of her arm. After remaining for about an hour, I observed that swelling rising up as if it were a worm moving from one place to another, but more lightly than seems possible, as if it were quicksilver flowing from one place to another.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then the pain moved to that area and settled into the muscle, and remained there for about an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then it moved to the other arm before reaching the other side of the body.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then it returned to me that it was moving throughout her body as I observed; and I was greatly amazed by its transformation and the speed from one member to another.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had seen this before in my other patients in the same manner; however, I have seen many cases where the pain is transferred from one limb to another.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But do not see this with the hands in the same way as in a woman. 
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I did not think it to be anything other than that the woman was of old age, or rather of dry body and exposed veins, and in this condition she felt this altered wind.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that this reverse treatment does not appear in those who are delicate and have a moist body with engorged veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you wish to cure him, and the patient feels that pain, at this time it does not appear to you as we have said, then you press on that area and place it lightly and cut into that spot where that constricted air is gathered, and cauterize the area.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not find it with your hands, then cure that by jolting the body and by expelling wind, and treat those with foul pills and with pills of senna and the like. 
De extraccio de sagetas.	From the extraction of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are diverse according to their types, and according to the places in the body where they strike, for their diversity is such that some have large points, and small ones, and concave ones, and dull ones; and there are those with three prongs, and of those which have barbs; and of those which have crossbars.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And the manner in which they affect the limbs and parts where they strike is according to two ways: for the limbs are either principal organs, such as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, intestines, bladder, and those similar; and thus when it strikes one of these organs and signs of death appear to you, which I will describe shortly, then you must avoid extracting the arrow in those where death is imminent. And when these bad signs do not appear to you, and the arrow is not hidden deep within the limb, then you extract that arrow and treat the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And the signs of injury when an arrow strikes and penetrates the bone, piercing the membrane over the brain, are as follows: there is severe headache, blindness, dizziness, inflammation and burning in the eyes, inflammation and burning of the tongue, spasms, confusion of mind, vomiting of bile, sudden loss of speech and destruction of voice, and a white moist substance like powder oozing from the wound site, and the appearance changes as if the flesh were affected with moisture.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And therefore, if these signs appear to you, then abstain from the treatment and extraction of the arrow, unless it is outside.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	And the signs of the arrow when it strikes the heart, so that it is near the left nipple, and you feel that it is fixed in a hard place, and not in a soft area; and the movement of the arrow is similar to the pulse's movement, and black blood flows from the wound, and there is coldness in the extremities, and cold sweat, and fainting; therefore, know that death comes swiftly.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the signs when the arrow has wounded the lung are spitting of foamy blood from the wound, and the vessels near the neck are inflamed, and the color of the patient changes, and they exhale a great spirit, and they seek a draught of fresh air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow strikes the membrane that is in the feet, and the pain is near the small bones, and there is great swelling with intense pain and sighing, and not all the muscles of the limbs are affected.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if you find an arrow in the stomach, then remove any undigested food from the wound.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the arrow is embedded in the abdomen and has pierced it, make an incision at the site of the wound, whether through the skin or intestine that has been ruptured, and there is no hope for the extraction of the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow hits the bladder and urine comes out, and some process from it spreads to parts outside, and severe pain is felt by the patient, then you know that it is mortal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	And the other parts as well, such as the face, the neck, and the jaw, the shoulders and the arms, and the vertebrae of the back, and the collarbone, and the thigh, and the calf and similar members, are saved according to the major dispositions when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery and is not a venomous arrow.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I will recount to you what I have observed about the nature of these arrows, so that you may understand its implications for your treatment.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause is as follows: in a man, an arrowhead became embedded in the lacrimal duct of his eye at the root of the nose, and I extracted it from the other side, leaving only a trace in his ear, and he was healed, without any harm to his eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I extracted another arrow from a Jew, which had struck him in the area around his eye, leaving the eyelid somewhat intact. The arrow was already concealed, and only a small part of its tip could be retrieved, to which the shaft adhered. It was a large, sharp arrow of the Turks, with a lion-headed point that had no fletching.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And it is beneficial for health, and not accidental that in his care there is no bad accident.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man who had been shot in the throat, and it was an Arabic arrow, which is the kind with ears; and then I incised around that between two glands, and it was already submerged in his throat; and then I maneuvered carefully with that, and then extracted it, and healed the Christian.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And he extracted another arrow from a man who had been shot in his abdomen, and the man thought he would die because of that; and thus, after thirty days had passed and there was no change in his condition due to any cause related to his disposition, he cut into the arrow and worked on it, and he was healed, and no adverse incident occurred to him.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw another man in whom an arrow had lodged in his back, and the wound had solidified over it; and after approximately seven years, the arrow was embedded at the root of his thigh.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman in whom an arrow had lodged in her abdomen, and the wound had solidified within her; and there was no change in her condition, and the woman did not suffer any harm in any of her natural functions.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And I saw another man in whom an arrow had lodged in his face, and the wound had solidified; he broke off the arrow, feeling no pain, and similar cases have been observed.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And he extracted the arrow from the man, who was a leader of the king, with the arrow lodged in the middle of his nose, which had slightly shifted to the right side, and the entire arrow was concealed.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called for his treatment shortly after the arrow wound within three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I found the arrow's wound very narrow; and then I searched for it with a fine probe, but did not feel it; but he felt a pricking at his right ear, and then I suspected that this pricking was due to the tip of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I applied a poultice with a plaster that has attractive and digestive properties, believing that the area will become inflamed so as to reveal the location of the arrow, by drying out around it.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And no significant event occurred in the area where the arrow had reached; and I continued with the plaster on it for many days, and no accident happened; and the wound healed during this time, and the patient was relieved of the discomfort for many days until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose and reported this to me.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then I applied a sharp and corrosive medicine on the wound for many days until it opened up, and with a probe, I felt around there, and found the tip of the arrow, which was attached to the bone.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then I adjust in the wound opening with that sharp medicine until the tip of the arrowhead becomes visibly apparent to me, and I proceed at my own pace with this method for a period of time spanning about four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And then when the wound has expanded, and it becomes possible for me to insert the scissors into it, and remain that way, without obeying any secretion, I do not cease to subtly work and devise methods on it ingeniously until one day I manage to grasp it with forceps carefully made, according to how their form will be shown at the end of the chapter, until I extract it; and then I restore that wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some doctors judged that the nasal cartilage cannot be restored, but I restored it, and the wound was consolidated, and the patient was healed completely, without any cause for concern.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recommend to you the quality of extracting certain arrows so that you pause and consider the significance of what I have not said, for the parts of this art and the definitions thereof are not understood through mere narration nor are they fully grasped by the book alone.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the wise artisans compare a little with much; and with what is present over what is absent; and they find new operations and new instruments by tracing back to the strange causes of the craft when accidents happen.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore I say that arrows are not removed from the limbs in which they are embedded except in two ways: either by attraction to the place where they enter; or by the opposite at the other end.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is pushed out from the place where it entered, or is a sliver protruding in fleshly areas, and is thrown out and expelled.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if you do not obey the timing of when to cut, then it is necessary that you wait for some days until the flesh around it rots and the attraction of it lessens and its expulsion becomes easier.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And similarly, if it is inserted into bones and does not respond to treatment, then leave that for several days and repeat the procedure with traction and movement each day, and it will be dislocated.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if it does not respond to your treatment after several days, then you must pierce around the arrow wound on that bone from all sides with a fine needle until the area of the arrow is enlarged, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrow is embedded in the bone of the head and has already advanced into one of the chambers of the brain, and the patient shows several of those symptoms that I mention, then refrain from extracting the arrow and leave it inside until the person's condition stabilizes over several days; for if the arrow reaches the spinal cord, then death is not long in coming.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is embedded only in the body of the bone and does not penetrate into the spinal cord, and the patient remains stable for several days without showing any of those symptoms, then you may proceed with the extraction of the arrow and treat the wound.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	But if it is deeply embedded and does not respond to extraction, then you should administer fine needles around the arrow as we have recommended, and then care for the area until it heals.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	If the arrow is already embedded in the body part and it is not felt, then you should search for it by touch, and if you feel it, then pull it out using suitable forceps that are appropriate for extracting it.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot reach it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the arrow, and there are no bones, nerves, or veins in the way, then you should cut into the wound until it is widened enough to extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if there are earrings through which it is held, then you should free the flesh in which they are embedded from all sides with all the skill you can employ; and devise a method for this, if you cannot extract the flesh due to the fracture of the earrings or their twisting until they break.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the arrow from any part where it is located, then you should use the strength of your hand and forceps in all directions until it obeys; and be careful with subtle skill so that the arrow does not break and that the extraction does not become difficult for you.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot do it during that time, then leave it for several days until the parts around it can soften, and then repeat what has been alleviated.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	But if blood flow is obstructed, then you should administer what we have said about treatment in the previous chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And observe the source of the vein or nerve, or tendon injury, and administer any method possible to extract the arrowhead; and do this with ease, calmness, slowness, and firmness as I and you recommend.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And therefore, make the arrowhead protrude so that the patient is according to the figure in which you should place the extraction of the arrowhead, for it is more advantageous.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	But if this is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	But for arrows that are embedded contrary to the other side, or if you find any part of it extending outward, or if the tip of the arrowhead becomes sticky due to the sensation from the part above the visible chain and bulges; then you should cut on that part; and make the incision according to the amount that the forceps can grasp; then pull it out, for it is made to come out easily in this manner.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if not, leave that for several days, and then repeat that within which it escapes. 
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the shaft of the arrow is in there, then you push it with it (likely meaning using an instrument).
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	But if the shaft has fallen and you want to administer an impulse, then insert it there, and if it is deaf (obstructed), dig a conical hole so that it enters the concavity of the arrowhead in the thigh and then push it with force.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	And if the arrow is concave, then you should forcefully push it inside using a tool, because the arrow is lightened by that.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the arrow is embedded, then you must draw out all the flesh in which it is lodged, if that is possible for you, and then treat that area with whatever is appropriate.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the arrow strikes the foot, or the abdomen, or the bladder, or the side, and is close enough that you can touch it with your hand, and it is possible to cut around it, then cut around it and be careful not to injure a vein or nerve, and extract it, and then clean the wound if necessary, and treat it until it heals.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Method of using forceps with which arrows are removed:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Let the ends of them be like a bird's beak, made like a saw when they grip the arrow so that they do not let it go.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And of those, various special sizes are made, large, small, and medium, according to the size of the arrow and its thickness, and the width of the wound, and the constriction of the area.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Form of emollient for sore extremity:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	And in this manner, so that the instrument inside him is lightened in the concave sagitta and is pushed by it.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Of course, let's translate the given line based on the pattern provided:
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins for bloodletting, of which there are typically thirty, with sixteen on the head. There are two pulsating veins near the ears called alhasisain; two veins apparent in both temples; and two veins in the tear ducts of both eyes, called aspicientz; a vein prepared at the center of the forehead; a vein at the tip of the nose; two veins on the neck; two veins on the upper lip; two veins on the lower lip; — these are the veins called algelic; and there are two veins below the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence line by line:
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot and thigh there are three veins; one of those is below the curve of the heel of the wild leg; and the second is sophena, and its location is below the thigh of the tame leg; and the sciatic vein, and its location is below the thigh of the wild leg; and in the thigh are other veins similar to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The healing of veins near the ears is for ancient and foreign catarrhs, migraines, and old ulcers on the head.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of bleeding those is according to what I recommend to you: it is that the head of the patient should be shaved, and the back of the patient's head at the occiput where both veins are located should be rubbed with a wide cloth using good friction; then tighten the patient’s neck with a band in such a way that two points appear near their ears on both sides of the head; feel for those with your finger, and if you sense the pulse of those veins with your finger, it is a sign to proceed.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then take the lancet, which is the instrument, and then insert it into the vein until the bloodletting needle reaches the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	Then raise your hand with the vein and the needle toward the parts above and incise the vein with an appropriate incision.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And let the length of the incision be the width of two fingers together or around that; and let as much blood come out as you wish.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then secure it with poultices and leave it until it is healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And already at the beginning of the book, the inscription about these and their cauterization has been mentioned.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	And of the two arterial veins that are in the temples, the help of bloodletting is for ancient migraines and severe evils and frequent ophthalmia and the discharge of acute superfluities to the eyes.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of bloodletting from those veins is as I recommend to you: have the patient turn their head so that the two veins appear clearly by feeling, and make it evident where they are with your finger; and then you may proceed to bleed.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then you raise the skin over the vein with your index finger above it, introduce the bloodletting instrument next to it, and lift the vein up; and incise it in the same way as you did for the other two veins; and let the blood flow according to the quantity needed.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then release the patient's constriction, and place your finger on the vein for about an hour; then apply a bandage and poultice over it and press tightly above with strong compression, and leave it until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And already preceding is the recollection of them, and from those, the inscription, and the attraction at the beginning of the book.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And therefore the treatment of venesection from the vein on the forehead is similar to the venesection of the cephalic vein for ancient diseases of the face and migraine and inflammation and foul ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of the phlebotomy is as I recommend to you: so it is that the patient holds their head with a bandage in such a way that the vein appears; and then take the instrument called a lancet, which has this form:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Place the tip of the instrument that is at the head of the probe over that vein and strike it with a lancet or another tool in the manner described, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you desire; then close the puncture wound of the patient and ensure that it heals.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And sometimes it is opened with a venesection knife, but the tip of this venesection knife does not need to be sharp like other venesection knives; instead, its end should be flattened, and you should cut across that area transversely, because the bone is very close and strong, and could be broken by the venesection knife if it were too fine.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	However, the treatment of the two veins that are near the tear ducts of both eyes for eye ailments due to inflammation and secretion in the eyes, and for diseases of the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	The method of the venesection is that the patient should hold their head with a bandage, and then perform the venesection, while you stand above their head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And the venesection should be performed transversely, a little along the length with a small venesection knife, because there is no flesh in that area; and if the venesection knife is too fine, its tip could easily break.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then let blood flow as much as is necessary for you, and place something over those spots, bind them tightly for one night, and then unbind them.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	And the flebotomy (bloodletting) of the nasal vein is appropriate for acute fever and violent heat, and for illnesses of the face, migraines, and swellings that occur in the face, especially when they are chronic.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of the bloodletting is such that the patient holds their head, and then you place your left hand under their nose, and take a fine long bloodletting instrument and insert it in the middle part of the tip of the nose according to correctness, for the vein does not appear visibly here, and the blood begins to flow immediately.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	You must gradually withdraw your hand with the small bloodletting instrument and let the blood flow according to your need; then bind it for one night, for it heals quickly.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	However, bloodletting from the two temples is beneficial for alleviating ailments such as air constriction and the onset of leprosy, various illnesses, impetigo, and severe corrosive ulcers, including herpes.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of the phlebotomy for them is that the patient should hold each one in their own arm with a bandage; and the surgeon stands over the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a chair.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And then perform venesection on the vein along its length with a small and wide lancet bit by bit; and then extract blood in a measured quantity or according to what you find necessary for this case; and then do likewise to the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then loosen the ligature and bind the two veins with a moderate tightness so that the patient is not choked, and leave it until the wound is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the treatment of venesection from larger veins helps with small abscesses and pus-filled sores in the mouth, corruption of the gums, bad ulcers and cracks, and also with bad ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of the venesection from those veins is that you make the patient sit in front of you, and bind his neck with a bandage. Then separate the lips and look at the two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the second on the left; the identification of each is by the darkness of each of both, and this is more evident where small black veins are around them. And then incise each vein with an appropriate incision.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	But if you have doubt and do not know which one of those [areas] it is, then you should make an incision in the larger one, and from that, the pus will clearly come out. 
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make an appearance of the two veins that are above the lips. 
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	But it is more customary to incise the two veins that are in the lip of it.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	And for two veins that are beneath the tongue, the remedy is close to bloodletting from the cephalic vein for conditions in the throat, diseases of the uvula, and ailments of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of flebotomar (bloodletting) is to follow the patient between your hands in front of sunlight, and lift their tongue, and observe its surface, from one side vein and from another side vein, and the color of each tends towards black.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then bleed each one; and be careful not to keep your hand too long while bleeding them, because those are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the veins that are bled in the thigh are those which customarily bleed throughout all men, and their bleeding is performed in two ways: either with a lancet dipped in crushed mirtle or olive; or by cutting with a knife-like instrument, and this is called alnessil, and this is its form:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this instrument is what you should use for the incision, and of those, select slender and fine ones according to the width of the veins and according to the tightness of them.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Form of mercury plebotomy:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	Here is the translation of the given line:
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the form of olive oil flebotomy:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this flebotomi (phlebotomy tool) is of lesser width and has a finer tip, and it is suitable for phlebotomy of fine veins that contain subtle blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	And the benefit of the phlebotomy of the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: for you extract blood from the illnesses that are below the jaw and neck, and from what affects the feet and abdomen.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it is necessary for the phlebotomist, when bleeding someone, to be very careful and have a heightened awareness of where that person's artery is, because if they make a mistake and puncture in the wrong place during phlebotomy, they could cut that artery and cause a flow of blood, so one must not perform phlebotomy with a sharp point, but rather through incision as necessary.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilic vein does not appear by clear manifestation, then you must leave that one and move to another, or seek some other branch instead; or perform phlebotomy at the end of the arm where it is visible; and dry that area with phlebotomy as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	And if you want to perform phlebotomy on the same area, then before the constriction of the arm, touch the spot between where you know the pulse is located, and then mark that spot with a nick; then extend the arm and dry the vein with a concave incision as we have said; and be careful not to hit the artery with any blow in that area.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you squeeze the ligature, if swelling occurs at the spot where you made the nick, then that swelling is from the artery, and therefore avoid that area.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if the blood flows during phlebotomy as urine from a child and the blood is fine and red, then you know it is arterial blood; and then you wait and place your finger over that spot for a long time; then remove your finger, and if the blood is interrupted, since it often stops in small drops, then you compress the arm and leave it.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And protect the patient from their own discharge, and be over-watchful of them and do not let that area become dirty for several days until they are healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	And if the blood is not stopped, and at times when no medicine for this is available to you, then incise the artery, if it appears to you; for the extremity of him is contracted, and the blood is stopped; or that you take a piece of linen, and use that, taking one half and tie that over the vein with a tourniquet and with bandages until the next day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the blood is stopped, that is good; and if not, then treat it with those methods that are recalled from the memory of places where powders to stop the flow of blood are used.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And stopping the bleeding from him is difficult in many situations due to the small size of the wound and the possibility of binding the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	However, for the dark vein, phlebotomy is beneficial for drawing blood from the upper part of the head and the corresponding part of the body; because it is composed of branches of the basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And the phlebotomist must be aware of the artery that is above in the phlebotomy site, because under it lies a nerve; and if during the puncture of the phlebotomy they encounter this nerve, the patient will fall into stupor, and healing becomes difficult for them, and often they are not fully cured. And this nerve sometimes appears to the touch; and if it is hidden from some people and is subtle and not easily found, then you must place your phlebotomist with whom you perform the phlebotomy using a section of annessil (a type of herb), and avoid the nerve with your skill.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then you should incise the vein along its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The benefit of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it draws blood from the head and helps with diseases of the eyes.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And it is proper in this case, if you want the phlebotomy to be performed with an olive phlebotomizer or a myrtle phlebotomizer; for it is the safest of all veins, as there are no arteries or nerves beneath it.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	And yet, you must take care in performing phlebotomy that with the lancet you do not just puncture the head of the vein, but seek the place where it is thinner, and do not touch it unless it is found by the first percussion which should be on that part several times for phlebotomy.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, in some people, a hematoma may form when phlebotomy is not performed during the first attempt, but do not touch that hematoma again. 
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	And here is the translation of the given sentence:
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first sentence describes the conditions and timing for performing phlebotomy (bloodletting), a common medieval medical practice. Here's my translation line by line:
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And let bloodletting be performed on the third day or at the earliest pus that forms, after three hours have passed.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	More phlebotomy which is administered, more when it brings convenience and necessity to do so, whether at night or during the day, at any hour and in any season.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And it is necessary that a child not be circumcised until they have reached the age of 14 years, and a pregnant woman should not be circumcised except from the fourth month up to the seventh, and elderly women who have already passed the age of 60 should not be circumcised.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And when someone wishes to be circumcised by any method, it is necessary to cleanse their intestines before the circumcision with a lion's cathartic, if there is retained fecal matter within them, so that the veins do not expel excesses into the circumcised area of the purified intestines, which could harm the principal limbs.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And patients who are habitually sacrilegious and drunkards should not be circumcised, nor those recently ill or intoxicated until these conditions have subsided, nor those suffering from dropsy. Moreover, circumcision should be avoided near colic pain, vomiting, abdominal swelling, frequent intercourse, labor, exercise, fasting, or wakefulness, and any cause that weakens the strength, whether bodily or in terms of vitality.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And before the procedure, consider the subtle influences of humors, especially if the blood is thick, by adjusting food and drink, and by using medicines if that is possible for the patient.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And then immerse in a bath if nothing prohibits it, or let it be exercised by some exercise so that the blood is refined.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And perform phlebotomy on him in the morning around the hour of terce, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And it is necessary that the foot of that patient be protected on that day from all bad animal accidents, such as distress, anger, fear, and from all bodily accidents, such as excessive labor, unnecessary pain, sorrow, and similar things.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And in its proper place, let the causes be present which are used according to the custom of men with aromatics and perfumes and with balms and similar things according to the quantity of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the phlebotomist onto a cushion that is higher than the cushion of the one who is to be bled.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And then extend their arm, and the surgeon should rub that area with his hand two or three times; then tighten the ligature with a strap and wrap it around twice.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And let the binding be moderate, for if the binding is not equal, or if the binding is due to excess, then it prohibits blood flow; or if it is with softening, then it prevents the body's blood from escaping.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And then for the binding, it is necessary that the person who is to undergo bloodletting rub their hands together until the veins are swollen and clearly noticeable.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And then the surgeon should anoint their lancet with a little of the proper oil; and then place the index finger of their left hand on that vein, leaving the spot for bloodletting, so that the vein protrudes slightly, and the pulsation can be felt to determine which veins are like cords and should be bled from, and those that are full of air will contract when the lancet is placed over them should not be bled from; and if the lancet does not penetrate the vein, it indicates that it is narrow.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And therefore, it is necessary that the phlebotomist be skilled and attentive in all these matters.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And then place the bloodletting tool, but if the vein is opened in one go, that's good; and if not, you repeat this another time while leaving that spot a little alone, or apply a bandage to it if the area is not inflamed. 
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the area is abscessed, or the patient shows fear, then you should leave it for a day or two, and do not tighten the bandage, because forcefully pulling an abscess can be harmful, nor should they enter into a bath.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And then repeat the phlebotomy if necessary.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the incision is small and blood flows subtly, and you fear that not enough blood will come out as desired, then you repeat the phlebotomy in that area according to what is right, and apply a little more on the incision, and do this quickly before the area becomes inflamed, for once the area is inflamed in many cases only a small incision should be made.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	But if you find that area already inflamed, then do not repeat the incision on it, for it does not help you in any way; and place some part of an ointment over it, for it alleviates the body from blood.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better in this case to use oil and the other ointments.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And similarly, apply ointment in all phlebotomies where you bleed the veins to reduce blood from the body, and use theriac, aloes, and sagzenea when one of these is placed on the area, for it makes the blood subtle and resolves it when it is thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if a large inflammation is generated at the site of the phlebotomy, which often happens, especially in those who have not been bled except for that one time, or where only a small incision was made on the vein, then you should treat it by placing a sponge soaked in water and salt, slightly heated, over the area, and keep it there for about an hour, as it dissolves the inflammation.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And this should be done near the emergence of the blood from that vein with a completion of it or another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if there remains in the area for several days some blackening or greenish color, do not worry about it; and if you wish, place over that area some mixture of aloes and myrrh dissolved, or some mixture of mint juice or calamint or similar to it.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And various white swellings and prominences should be treated with bloodletting from the basilic vein. 
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And then place your hand on that area, and if you find softness there, apply your compression to that spot, because that prominence is harmful and bad; and therefore be careful not to press on it for any reason we have mentioned, for fear that blood will flow from the artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And make a poultice with something that has astringent properties, so that the area becomes hardened, and then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And it is necessary to withdraw blood from every person according to the quantity of their strength and according to the dominant color in their blood as it appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	For if the blood is black, you should let it flow until it becomes red; and similarly, if you see it thick, you should let it flow until it becomes thin; and likewise, if it is sharp, you should let it flow until its sharpness is reduced.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And for those who are full and strong and have a need for blood extraction in one session, the incision of the vein should be enlarged and the bloodletting should be broad.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And in that which is swollen, the opposite should be done of that, and it needs to be drained in frequent doses, and its course should be direct.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best that is administered in venesection is that the incision be transverse, not a puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this method of venesection is safer from blood flow and nerve injury, and it is more praiseworthy and safer than venesection along the length.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And it is customary for fainting to occur after venesection, and you must treat this before the venesection with a little bread infused in pomegranate juice or in heated simple oxymel; and extract the blood in three or four portions.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if it is chilled due to composition, then take before venesection bread infused in myrrh syrup or in aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and the like, or in an aromatic and fragrant syrup.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if fainting occurs after venesection and is caused by the loss of much blood, then it is necessary to drink water mixed with a fragrant and subtle syrup; and use aromatics like algarella, and anoint their feet with it.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division in the chapter on syncope for evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And if one wishes to reduce the swelling of his arm and dissolve his blood for the second time, it is necessary for him who undergoes phlebotomy as a means of evacuation, and the virtue in it is cold, which evacuates the blood little by little, according to the quantity of this virtue over several consecutive days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	And if one wishes to reduce the swelling of his arm and draw his blood for a second time, and his body is strong, then let him do this approximately seven or nine hours after the first phlebotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	And if one wishes to draw the blood from his body away from the part to which it has declined, it is necessary that he be bled on the second or third day.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	And for that body in which hot and thin blood has already been stirred up and is acute, causing fever, it is necessary to bleed the person all at once and extract a large quantity of blood, increasing the flow until syncope occurs, provided that you have maintained all the conditions of phlebotomy; and place your hand on the pulse of the patient to ensure they do not die instead of just fainting, for many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And when you want to loosen the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, once the vein's orifices are already closed and it has become difficult for the blood to flow out, that you press on it with force and slightly extend the bent area, for this is too harmful.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	They have the incision within which they apply a flea-biting instrument secondarily; or they remove this with the sharpness of a fleabiting tool that is clotted with blood in the opening of the vein; or place upon it theriaca alfarachi, or sagzenea, and compress it with slight pressure until the blood has been completely drained out.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is inflamed, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the inflammation has subsided.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if the necessity to evacuate blood secondarily is provoked and there is no excuse not to, then you should bleed that area at that spot or in the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called the "sinew of the arm" is incised at the fossa or the basilic site, when those are not found or are hidden, because it is composed of those veins. 
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient introduces their hand into warm water until the vein becomes red and appears clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And then tightly bind that area with moderate tension using a bandage; and then perform puncturing across the small transverse direction, not longitudinally or latitudinally.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And let the incision be wide and perform your puncture with which you pierce that area near the joint of the hand slightly.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of blood is stopped, then soak the hand in warm water and let the blood flow into the water until you achieve your goal.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	However, if you are in the summer days, then you are excused from soaking the hand in warm water, and instead, the body of the blood should be placed in warm water during winter. 
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than that of all other veins, because it does not have a pulsating vein or nerves. 
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the phlebotomy of the right hand vein is related to diseases of the liver.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of the phlebotomy is such that you should stretch the arm with a bandage or with your hand, after placing it in hot water, until the vein swells and becomes clearly visible; then perform the phlebotomy across this vein; and if you cut through it completely, do not damage anything beyond necessity.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And be careful not to move your hand during the phlebotomy, for doing so could expose the nerves of the fingers without skin.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	Then soak the hand in hot water and let the blood flow into it, for if you do not soak it in hot water, the blood will clot at the opening of the vein and obstruct the flow.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when the required amount of blood has been drawn, then place oil and salt on the vein so that it does not close too quickly; similarly, you should do this at every incision.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	However, the phlebotomy of the left hand vein is related to diseases of the spleen.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And similarly in the phlebotomy of this one as you have done in the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the benefit of opening the saphenous vein through phlebotomy is for diseases that are in the lower part of the body, such as illnesses related to the uterus, and for the retention of menstruation, and for diseases of the swollen and ulcerated thighs and ancient sores on the buttocks, and similar kinds of diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of the phlebotomy is such that the patient immerses their foot in warm water and performs friction until the veins become clearly visible; tie above the joint of the foot with a bandage; identify the location of the vein where it becomes clearly apparent, and from there, its branches spread across the surface of the foot like small streams.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And then perform phlebotomy on the largest branch below the ankle where the swelling is, as it is better and more beneficial.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you perform phlebotomy on the surface of the foot, be careful of the nerves that are below and on the surface of the foot, and position your phlebotomy such that you cut across it, as if you were incising it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And let the bloodletting begin. 
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	But if bleeding is prohibited; then you soak the foot of the patient in warm water and let the blood flow into that so that it may be evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the phlebotomist makes a mistake on the first attempt, then repeat with phlebotomy slightly apart, for the area is salty; and do not fear malevolence, but rather be careful of the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And similarly apply the sulfuric mixture to the other foot in the same way. 
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And concerning the sciatic vein, the location is as we have said, below the heel, leaving the ligament of the wild part.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the treatment for hip pain when it is due to blood corruption is phlebotomy (bloodletting).
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient enter into a bath, and he should bend and stretch his leg on the side where the vein is located above the ankle with a long thin bandage, for it only works by this means.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And therefore when it appears, then you perform a puncture according to each skill that is possible for you and according to the transverse position, which is better; or incise that area through an incision or section that area through a section, for the location of it is suitable.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is in many men somewhat similar; and if you find that one, and it does not appear fully to the senses, then bleed some branch of it, which appears on the back of the foot instead of the artery near the little toe.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And be careful of the nerves, and let as much blood flow as you wish.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Then release the constriction and place something over the site of the phlebotomy, compress the area, because it heals quickly.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Regarding ventosation and the qualities of using them.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, or de veyre.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And bloodletting is performed in two ways: one of them is by scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is bloodletting without scarification.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this bloodletting without scarification is done in two ways, either with fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the locations on the body where bloodletting is administered through scarification and extraction of blood are fourteen in number, among which one place for bloodletting is alnocrati, which is the back part of the head; another location is at both sides of the neck equally; bloodletting from the chin below the mandible and below the mouth; bloodletting from both armpits; bloodletting from alohoster, which is above the shoulder blade; bloodletting from both elbows, which are on both arms; bloodletting from both calves; and bloodletting from both thighs.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And in bloodletting, do not extract blood from the small veins scattered throughout the flesh, for by doing so you do not diminish their strength as happens with arteriotomy; nor should bloodletting be performed with or without fire in any disease caused by excess until the whole body is evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	Here is the translation of the provided medieval medical text into English:
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore when dealing with any of those causes, and specifically if it is in the third month or a bit later, then I command that ventilation be performed more than two or three hours after noon.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And the treatment for vertigo from the neck is that when you apply pressure to the head and cause it to sink into the pillows; but it must be done close to a complete evacuation of the whole body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this cupping is applied at the site of venesection of the cephalic vein. 
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not good for one of cold temperament or in whom there is catarrh to use it, for it causes great harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And for this reason, it is not suitable for the elderly to use it, and in those heads which have cold illnesses.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	May it be that for one who continues to use it, forgetfulness sets in; therefore, you must command the cupper to pause his hand slightly from the cupping at certain parts, to prevent the generation of forgetfulness. 
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	When alcohol vapor is in the place of bloodletting from the saphenous vein and basilic vein: by this you can treat asthma, airway constriction, windpipe rupture, cough, and accumulation.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And it is necessary to expel the wind with a little alcohol, for if it remains there, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And the venting of alhagdahan (a term that seems to refer to some form of air or gas) contributes to headaches and ophthalmia, and migraines, and suffocation, and pain in the roots of the teeth; and it is used instead of trephination of the basilica (likely referring to a specific area of the skull).
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And you must command the ventozador (one who performs cupping or similar treatments) not to press his hand too hard, so as not to cut into the artery and cause bleeding.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And the venting from under the chin contributes to alcoholism in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and resembles diseases that are in the mouth, and it is used instead of trephination for conditions in both lips. 
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	And the swelling that is caused by the two spatulas should be treated with cataplasma, which is made to increase heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the inflation of the two parts inside the veins contributes to the effectiveness of phlebotomy from three veins, which are the basilic, saphenous and cephalic, because those attract blood from all those smaller veins that are in the flesh, and those smaller veins from other larger veins until the attraction reaches the three main veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the surgeon not to proceed too much in the incision, for the area is bare of flesh, and leave his nerves and arteries untouched.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is a cupping where it is applied over the thighs and addresses the hemorrhoids of the anus and the pus-filled ulcers.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And you must command the blood-letter to make a large leeching, and that it be of a strong nature, for the area requires strong drying; and strongly apply the subtle leeches and let it be scarified with scarification.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta,
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, fevers weaken the entire body and cause fainting in many people.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And regarding the application of cupping, it is commonly applied to the back and chest areas with two cups.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the cupping position is such that you place the cup at the beginning, and suction gently and promptly, without prolonging the placement of the cups. Place them lightly, remove them courteously, so that the humors come to the surface as intended.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not stop repeating this process and continue until you see the area become red and swollen, and the coagulation of blood appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And now you should perform scarification and gradually repeat the suction, and then consider the disposition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	For that person who has tender flesh and few pores, you should scarify them once and not more, so that the area does not become ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And instruct the cupper to increase the scarification slightly and to apply suction with ease.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if there is thickening in the blood, then it is necessary to perform scarification twice, for in the first session the path for subtle extraction of the blood and its moisture is opened.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	But in the second part of the careful examination obtained from the extraction of thick blood. 
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the blood is very thick, then a third scarification should be made so that the last one is successful.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And finally, when we want to extract blood slowly or in small amounts, a scarification is enough for us.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we do so with a large scarification; and if we know that the blood is thick, then we must scarify with an even deeper incision.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term "scarification" refers solely to the depth of the cut.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the vein is thick, hard, dark, and its pores are narrow, it is necessary that the sites for cupping be anointed more gently, more openly, and more to resolve; if it is summer, use oils such as aloe oil, violet oil, or elderflower oil, or coltsfoot oil; and if it is winter, then use narcissus oil, lily oil, camomile oil, or blood oil, and similar ones.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the excess is thick and cold, then the oil should be marjoram oil, or balsamite oil, or aloe oil, or anise oil, and similar ones.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	And if the bloodletting area is of large pores with tender flesh, then it must be prohibited from using oil, and it must be that at these places where leeches are applied for bloodletting, they should be washed with cold water or fresh spring water, or water from a well, or rainwater, and similar things to those.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And for the one whose blood is of excessive moisture, wash the areas where leeches are applied with sour wine, or with water from myrtle and sumac and similar things to those.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And for the one whose excesses are thick, wash the areas where leeches are applied with old wine, or with hyssop water, which is marjoram, or from the decoction of dill, or chamomile, and things similar to those.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And it must be that bloodletting is protected before bathing; generally, it must be administered close to the bath by one or two hours, and they must sleep near the time of bloodletting.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	And it must be that bloodletting is regulated before the procedure; generally, it must be controlled before performing bloodletting. 
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And restrict their food as if they were fasting, and serve them bird meat, and seasoned foods with herbs, and similar items.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And for those whose condition is hot, it is necessary that they drink almond syrup or anise seed syrup with sumac and sweet-smelling wine mixed between old and new; and it should be advised to them to use moderation in drinking and eating, and to avoid foods like pork, hempseed, pheasants, small birds, and pigeons.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And it is necessary that on the day of bloodletting and flebotomy, drinking should be more than eating.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And it is necessary that in certain hours, some people should be given to drink theriac alpharac, or medicines of musk, such as mastic, or acetit before bloodletting or flebotomy or afterwards, so that the principal limbs may be comforted and the blood made subtle; and they should not take those heated substances.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	But the bloodlettings that are performed by scarification should be done on areas such as the liver, and on the spleen and gout-affected areas, and around the navel, at the sites of the joints, and on the spine of the back, for these parts cannot tolerate scarification directly on them.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not desired for those but the suction of blood from the limb, just as placing a cupping glass over the breast in the illness of nosebleed; and use that by which the cold viscous wind trapped in the limb may be dissolved, just as placing [a cupping glass] on the abdomen and navel; for it rarefies the limb, warms it, and removes the pain when you resolve the trapped wind.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is already placed on the lungs when you encounter their obstruction or phlegm, for by the power of strong suction, it overcomes the obstruction and removes the phlegm from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And similarly, it acts when placed on the liver and spleen to expel the wind trapped in those organs.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these cupping glasses are applied only with suction; and at times, they are applied with heat.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And at times, they are applied filled with warm water in the illnesses of the spleen.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And this is done so that the cupping glass may be filled and become larger, whether it is hot water alone or water in which suitable herbs for this purpose are boiled.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of cupping administered with fire: let the diameter of the opening be two fingers wide, as we have formed it; and the quantity of air should be half a palm; and it should be on his side, in the place that is around it, halfway, the hole should be small so that an needle can enter into it.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Make it of iron or copper, with thick edges, round, equal, and smooth so that it does not alter the member's position on it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And place in the middle of a transverse perch of ash or iron where a candle with fire is placed.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this cupping glass is larger than the one we have recommended; and it should be smaller than that according to the illness and the age of the person using it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the cupping glasses for children and those who are weakened are different from the cupping glasses for young adults and those with strong bodies.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	The quality of applying this cupping glass with fire on the limb is to extend a strip of cloth with fire from decent wood in front of a small candle, and place that at the center of the crossbar in the middle of the cupping glass, so that the fire can be lit around it without burning the patient's body.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And then it should be placed on the patient's limb, with the finger over the spot we mentioned. However, when you have the cupping glasses and do not want to keep your finger there for the vapor to rise over that spot, the cupping glass will soon become loose.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And then ignite the cloth according to its method, and repeat that if you need to do so. 
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	And in the case of suction cups that are administered for pleurisy, with water, in which there is no cross-bar or handle, and it is not administered except when it is filled with water, and it is placed over the limb only temporarily.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is its form: And this cupping device, the larger it is, the better, because it can receive a large quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Capitol .xcvii.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Bloodletting is not administered in many parts of the body but only in those parts where it is impossible to apply cupping due to their small size, such as the armpit and gums and similar areas; or in parts devoid of flesh, such as the fingers and nose and similar areas.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those leeches that you have found in the waters that are clean and free from putrefaction.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And then they should be left day and night in clean water until they become hungry, and that no remnants remain in their stomachs; then the body should be purged at the beginning with bloodletting and cupping; then rub the patient’s limb until it reddens; then place them on it.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are full and fall off.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to draw out the fluid from the area using cupping, it is more beneficial for healing.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, then wash the area with vinegar and then with clean water; and it should be rubbed and squeezed.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the blood flow is extended near the site of the leeches, and it continues to ooze, then soak a cloth in cold water, and place that over it until the oozing stops.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the blood is multiplied, then sprinkle finely ground vitriol or gall and things similar to it which are styptic, until the blood is stopped; or place on the area the pods of cooked fava beans, and leave them until the beans adhere to the area, and thus the blood is stopped.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And it is necessary, if required, to repeat bloodletting, changing the spots when possible.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if bloodletting is prohibited due to suspension, then rub the area with fresh blood or insert a needle into the spots until blood comes out; and then apply [a treatment], for those who feel some blood immediately respond to it.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to discharge, sprinkle a little finely ground alum or salt or ashes on them, and they will discharge immediately.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begins the section of the third part: on restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine; it is about the restoration of fractures and dislocations in the bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	O, son, know that those who boast about this chapter are foolish doctors and common ones, and those who for some time did not regard the books of the Ancients nor read a letter from them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason it is made that this manner of the learned in our land is kept private; and I have not forgotten any of this at all; and I have not applied what follows without a long reading of the books of the Ancients and study on understanding those, among which I extracted the knowledge from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And then direct towards experimentation and study throughout the length of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described in this chapter all that my knowledge contains and on which my experience has passed; since I have summarized this for you others and freed it from unnecessary extension; and summarized this at the end of summarization; and shown this at the end of explanation; and formed several forms of treatments that are administered, as is done by adding to the explanation, just as I have done in the two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	First chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summary and collections concerning bone fractures, of which a preliminary discussion is necessary before we begin the recollection of fractured limbs and the various aspects of each one.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Therefore, in the introduction of this chapter, we should discuss the main points of the sermon; and the chapters must be understood by which, at the beginning, the artisans are compelled to stand on the truth of those things; so it is for you and those who are quick to know or learn this noble art other than yourselves.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore I say that when you encounter a fracture or dislocation or twist or sprain, then it is necessary to start with flebotomy [bloodletting] or setting it, or both together, unless some cause prohibits it, such as weakness of strength, or if the person affected is a child, or an old man in decrepitude, or it is during a time of intense heat, or of intense cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	Then one should be content with food such as fresh herbs and the meat of birds and crabs; and we prohibit heavy meats and overfilling oneself with foods and all food that fills the veins with blood, except when you are sure of a safe cautery to prevent an effusion of matter into the limb.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to their original regimen with which they are accustomed to.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And therefore, as the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that the patient be fed nutritious foods rich in thick and heavy nourishment, such as those with viscosity, like foods made of baked wheat with water, rice, beans, fish, cow's stomachs, eggs, fresh cheese, thick wine, and similar items. With this regimen, the coagulation of the fracture occurs more easily and better.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And know that bones that crack in young men and the elderly cannot be naturally continued or consolidated due to the drying out of their members.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are solidified and continued according to their nature over time by the drying of those members, and thus continue to solidify those that belong to them at the end of the softness, just as the bones of young children do.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	But yet nature adjusts and brings together the broken bone from all sides with something similar to glue in which there is a thickening that adheres and strengthens between what is simultaneously conglutinated and bonded together, until strength and firmness come, just as fire at the beginning, until no cause prevents it from performing its functions.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason, it is necessary to stop the foods of the patient, foods that are heavy and viscous and large, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	And describe the diversity of fractures according to the diversity of the limb.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And know that the types of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the limbs, for a fracture of the bone in the head is different from a fracture of the bone in the shoulder; and a fracture of the bone in the foot is different from a fracture of the bone in the back; and similarly all other limbs are different among them.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I will include a recollection of every type of fracture, explained in its own separate chapter distinct from the other.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Note the diversity of fractures within itself.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the types of bone fractures are diversified within themselves; for there is an arched fracture which occurs in the stars [likely meaning the ribs or other curved bones]; and sometimes a fracture follows the length of the bone: and these are the fractures of the shafts, ribs, and condyles, both displaced and not displaced, just as it is done when a pen is prepared for writing, and there is a fracture with swelling and disruption at the head [likely referring to the end or joint of the bone], and there is a small fissure fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And each type has its own method or treatment for restoration, which will be recalled separately in its own place.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Sign of bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And by this the fracture of the bone is known: it is the twisting of it, and that prominence and appearance of it to the touch, and its sound when you press it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore, when there is no apparent twisting in its place nor any sound made by your touch when you move the bone and the patient does not find great pain, then there is no fracture here.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	Sometimes there may be twisting or a small fissure, in which case you should not forcefully move it with your hand and through compression; sometimes apply medicine over it from those that recall the proper alignment at that moment when it is needed for the area; and then bind it tightly by subtle constriction.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And know that the place which is curved and not split into two or any other such accident that does not happen to it, where the entire part of its composition is dislocated, then you should begin from the very moment to the correction of it, sometimes applying a poultice to prevent inflammation.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if inflammation does occur, then leave it for several days until the inflammation subsides; and then treat it in whatever manner you can with轻柔与巧思。(注：最后部分的翻译做了适应性调整，以确保语句通顺且符合中文表达习惯。)
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And know that the restoration and healing of the flesh is quicker than that of the bone where the injury occurs.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And then strengthen that second part so that the memory of it returns.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	But if the injury is in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken limb from both ends, whether it is an arm or a foot; or with your hand if the limb is small; or with two ropes or one rope and your hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And you should position the limb in such a way that you place it according to its natural shape, while the broken parts are extended, so that you can effectively return those parts to their proper places using ingenuity and in whatever manner possible.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And be careful according to your strength that you do not cause pain or injury to the patient through your operation; and do your best to align one bone with its companion in their best possible forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And it is necessary that at that moment you skillfully touch with your hand the affected area, and if there is any other cause, correct it and adjust it according to the extent of your ability.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And violent extension and compression are equivalent, just as some foolish doctors do at times, causing abscesses to occur due to their operation, or causing contraction in the limb, which we have seen happen through their operations on many occasions.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And then attach, a proper adjustment and decent operation and constriction of that member, and rest and tranquility; warn the patient about this and make them understand not to move that part during their wakefulness and sleep, avoid its rolling and agitation, and prevent all its movements with all its strength; and wait until the position of the member is one in which pain is secured, which occurs when it is in a position that causes pain or injury; therefore, you must change it to another position where there is no pain felt; and ensure with this that the patient’s position is correct and equal so that when restored, the member does not suffer distortion.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the constriction of the tranquilized member is what I recommend; so that you know that broken members are diverse in their smallness and in their greatness and in the form of those. 
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And of those that are small like the arm and the thigh and the calf and similar to these, it is necessary at this time that the wrapping be of very fine cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	And for those that are large like the thigh or the hip, it is necessary to wrap them tightly and firmly, because the tight binding connects the large and strong limb on all sides with equal pressure, in such a way that no impurity enters.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And then begin, for your reduction of the dislocation, to apply an appropriate bandage over the area of that fracture with three or four layers according to what the limb requires; and hold your hand slightly with the bandage. 
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then come with that to the highest part of the fracture location, and tighten more so that your binding does not loosen with which you have bound the area of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And then lengthen the area of the fracture slightly by winding, and gradually loosen the binding little by little until you have straightened the area significantly.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And then take another bandage and wrap that area again over the broken part with winding, and then bring the windings to the part furthest from the fracture; and let your operation be in the binding of the winding and in the loosening as we have said in the first wrapping above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then place between the windings some wool or cloth with which to straighten the curvature of the fracture if there is any curvature; and if not, do not place anything in it for any reason.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then place another bandage over it, and then apply properly made plasters over these windings immediately, if there is no inflammation or abscess in the area; and if there is an abscess or inflammation, place something over it that reduces the abscess and alleviates the inflammation; and leave that for several days; and then tighten the plasters over it.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And let the plasters be half a cane in length and properly shaped; or they may be made of pine wood; or from palm leaves; and let the width of each plaster be according to this form and this figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, the splint that is placed on that fracture must be slightly thicker and wider than the other splints, and the length of the splint should correspond to the size of the member in magnitude and smallness; then tighten over the splints with another band according to your first binding; then remove it above properly with wax as we have said about binding, which is that your binding should be tighter at the location of the fracture more so, and the further away from the fracture, the looser the binding.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And it is necessary that the threads be medium in thickness and fineness, and they should be made of linen; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the operations of some foolish surgeons who use ropes of twisted material for their threads, it is a great error, when cutting the binding out of equality [meaning not evenly].
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And likewise, very fine threads are not suitable, because you will not achieve with those threads what you wish through binding, and there should be no less than a finger's width between splint and splint.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is hurt by the edges of the splints near the binding at those points, then place some wool or padded linen between them so that it does not cause injury to him.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	At certain times a fracture occurs with inflammation, and disruption happens in the chain, and I will come back to this with a reminder in that chapter under singularity.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And know that all fractured limbs are not immediately set with splints on the first day; this is because when the limb is large, it does not need to be placed on the splints right away but rather after five or six days, or more, according to your assurance of the occurrence of inflammation.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the method of plasters with which the Ancients would treat fractures, dislocations, and twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Method of making a plaster for the restoration of fractures, suitable for various complications and especially for women and children, as it does not produce heat or irritation: take flour dust, which is the fine powder that settles on the mill's walls due to the motion of the millstone.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And prepare it thus: sieve it with egg white and make the mixture neither too thick nor too thin; then use it accordingly.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method of plaster for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists: take an equal amount of dragon's blood (about 10 drachms) each of asafetida, ladanum, acacia, enula, and megrim, which is the seed of wild millet; also take myrrh and aloes each about 5 drachms, and aloe juice about 20 drachms. All should be crushed and sieved, then mixed with alkaline water or egg white if the patient’s condition is inflamed. Then use this plaster, as it has a good composition that easily restores broken bones and should be recommended to many people.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another method for making a poultice that you apply to fractures and sprains: take myrrh and add white marshmallow, each by weight of ten drachmas; of frankincense and aloe vera, each by weight of five drachmas; of acacia, six drachmas; of Armenian bole, twenty drachmas.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All shall be crushed in a mortar with great care, and they shall be sifted, and they shall be mixed with water or egg white and then administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Method for making a poultice for joints and bones that are out of place, which causes pain in those areas as well as fissures and fractures: take clean wool, soak it in sweet wine and boiled oil, and place it over the affected area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	However, in this poultice, there is no virtue of restoration; rather, it is meant to cauterize and properly expel the pain.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method for a plaster that restores broken bones: take the bark of a fig tree and the bark of wild poppy; grind all of them together and make a plaster from them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Method of a short plaster administered for the restoration of bone fractures and when you want resolution of the remaining abscess: take roots of elder, chamomile, and flowers of violets, flour of iris, all in equal parts; let them all be crushed and mixed with wine, if the member is not inflamed.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	And if it is inflamed, then soothe it with coriander water or with water and oil of it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method of plaster stronger in resolution than this first one, when you encounter a hard abscess and need the restoration of the limb: take roots of coltsfoot and seeds thereof, and hawthorn, sweet clover, marjoram, violet flowers, camomile, all in equal parts and well mixed; all should be crushed and steeped in sage water or fresh water or wine, all according to the quality of the limb and the color condition of it.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	May Hippocrates not say in his book that it should be placed on the fractured limb for its restoration, but rather a salve made of wax and oil, and nothing else; and he recommends that it be intermediate between thickness and fineness.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	May it be observed in Gaul that they place on the broken limb for its restoration and the causes which are drying with a little heat, such as myrrh, resin, and similar substances to those causes we have mentioned.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Method of plaster that alleviates injury and pain: take mastic, chickpeas, human placenta or dove droppings, coltsfoot, and salt, all in equal parts; they should be crushed, sieved, steeped, and then made into a plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	And the quantity according to which the binding should remain and then be loosened is that you consider if it is not an accidental pain or a sharp pain nor is the bone broken or dislocated, then you do not loosen for many days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if you encounter a place with intense pain or swelling, then you should bind or loosen that area immediately, and remove the plaster from it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take linen cloth and marine sponge wetted with water, and submerge that in tepid water, and wash the area until the swelling subsides and the pain is soothed; then let the limb rest for an hour; then place upon it wool soaked in sweet wine and oil or ointment, and bind it over for a night until you are sure there is no danger of abscess, and that the inflammation of the limb has ceased, and the pain is alleviated.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then apply that gentle binding and a small plaster without making it as tight as your first constraint, and do so gently until it is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if you find that the abscess and the hardness and the pain and the inflammation and all the symptoms have been entirely alleviated, and there is no longer a need for plasters and bindings, then you should repeat the process in the same way as you did at the beginning.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if you do not encounter any of the causes we have mentioned in the limb, then do not loosen it but wait for three or four or five or seven days; and sometimes this is left for twenty days according to what appears to you regarding the loosening of the limb, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and approaches the coagulation of the flesh over it.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And now adjust more in the constriction than in your first constriction overall, and adjust according to the swelling of the food of the patient, as it is preceded by the recollection of him.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	If you see the location of the fracture already dry and exhausted more than it should be, then know that nourishment is prohibited from reaching there; therefore, foment that area with lukewarm water continuously while you dress it; and this should be done for all three days; and ease the tightness a little, and by this operation, nutrition flows to the limb, and it heals gently.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	However, what those unskilled restorers of a fractured limb do otherwise when it is not restored at the beginning as it should be, and is restored with deformity, is an error according to their operation, causing great fear; if this were corrected, the Ancients would have expanded on this in their books and acted accordingly.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen any of them do this, which is why it is more reasonable that this should not be done.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter second: On fractures when they occur in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The types of fractures are many, and their forms are diverse, and the causes are distinct. Some fractures are caused by the impact of a club, where the impact crushes all the bone inside the skull, which is left as bone, just as this happens to a tree trunk; therefore, this type is called ascial. Or the club incises some part of the bone and cuts into the flesh but does not penetrate through to the back side; this kind of fracture is called levatio absoluta.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the harm from these two fractures is either great or slight, and of a fracture that is comminuted or impacted; and the cause of it is percussion with a blunt object or falling on stone, and similar causes.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture either is penetrating and approaches the periosteum which is beneath the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone, and the severity of these two fractures can be great or slight.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And regarding fractures, it is displaced in the bone, in the subtlety of small hairs, and thus this type of fracture is named capillary.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And it is a fracture that is caused either by a fall or by the impact of a stone and similar objects, which causes some fragments of the bone to enter the inner parts, and it occurs in the concave area, just like when you strike the tiles on a roof and they break with their shards entering inward.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And this is particularly done in bodies of moist bones, such as infants' heads.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And thus to all these types of fractures, they apply weights such as separate stones.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And I will return to all this with further explanation in its proper place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And know all these types of fractures by detection on them and by inquiry into their attempts and the presence of corrupted flesh that is over them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And the capillary type is known by what is discovered on the bone, which is cleaned and wiped over with cloth, for the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	In the treatment of fractures, first consider the symptoms of the patient, and if you see by the symptoms that they indicate manifestly dangerous signs such as vomiting from anger, stretching, loss of understanding, loss of voice, fainting, acute fever, discharge from the wounds and inflammation around them, and similarities to these symptoms in severe conditions, then know that healing is not possible.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you face uncommon accidents and hope for recovery, then you begin the treatment of him.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	Which means that if the injured person comes to you at the beginning of winter while they are still injured, then you must study the setting of the bone before the fourteenth day according to all dispositions.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is during the days of summer, then you must take care to set the bone before the seventh day, because what is left in the bone may be corrupted by pus, and accidents that we have recounted may occur.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already penetrated to the pus covering the brain and is in small fragmented and gritty pieces, then you must incise the fragmented and gritty parts, as I will recount to you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And you shave the head of the injured patient, and expose the bone according to your custom and method as much as possible based on the nature of the injury, making it light for the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if you encounter difficulties in the detection of the bone, such as blood flow or an abscess requiring cautery, then you should intervene with what is necessary, which is to fill the area with cloths soaked in wine and oiled with rose oil, and allow the wound to rest until the abscess is calmed, and ensure that the blood flow stops; then proceed with the reduction of the bone and its proper positioning.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this should be done in one of two ways of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And one method is that you incise the bone with a straight grooved incisor, and this is its form: And then apply another incisor like this one, slightly more to the side than the previous one; and this is its form.
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then apply another incisor further to the side than the second one.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And it is necessary that you have various incisors of different kinds, some of which are wider apart than others; and some of them are shorter than the others and are sharp at their ends, and they should be made of Indian iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them easily during the percussion on the incisors so that the head does not become blunt and remains sharp.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and hard, then you must perforate around it before applying the incisors with the drills, which are called non-deepening drills.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are called this way because these drills do not reach the end of the bone but only get close to it; thus, the drill has a rounded end or edge on top, with its sharp head resembling a small margin or circle, which prevents it from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is appropriate that you take many of these needles, each of which should be suited to the sharpness needed for each bone; among them there should be one at your disposal for all parts of the skull, with its end being sharp, and the length and brevity should be according to the degree of sharpness needed for this part.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the form for three types of needles: The quality of piercing around the broken bone is that you place the needle on the bone and rotate it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then move the needle to another location, placing it so that the distance between each puncture is about the width of a finger or thereabouts.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	Then cut with the incisor between each fracture of the bone, making as fine a cut as you can at the end where it is loose, as we have said, until you clear out the bone, either by hand or by using other tools that you will prepare for this purpose, such as tongs and fine forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And you must be careful with all caution that the incisor does not touch any part of the spine.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And therefore, once you have circled the perforated bone, and it will be separated from the chip if it continues with it, and you will extract that, scrape and equalize that on the roughness of what is in the bone using another instrument similar to a chisel, but however it must be more tenon-like and subtler than other chisels.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if any small and brittle parts of the bones remain, then take those easily with what you must use from the instruments; then treat the wound with lint and ointments which we have mentioned.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the other method of operation is lighter, farther from fear, which you dissect Gualia and open with great caution; and this is what he says: it is necessary for you at the beginning to begin uncovering the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most forceful and most apparent, such that when you have uncovered that part and have placed under it the extremity of this gentle and happy instrument of which this is the form:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And here is the translation line by line:
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then strike on the incision of one part with a small hammer between which you cut through the entire bone so easily as it is turned, and be sure of the periosteum that no accident happens to it in any way, and even if the medic was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant among them; certainly, and even if he were asleep.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	When if any fragment attached to the bone of the abdominal region in some places of the bones, cut that part with the sharp end of a lens-shaped instrument, and remove it easily, for it is removed without harm and without fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the subcutaneous tissue, and what is severed or remains of the bone is its surface, and roughness and subtle splinters remain in it, then you must scrape away that roughness and eradicate those splinters with fine razors which you have prepared in various quantities so that you can apply them in all the most appropriate places for their use and the most precise ones according to where your operation on that broken bone and its shape requires.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And you must use the coarsest of those razors at the beginning to scrape the bone, and then gradually use the finer ones, and do not stop doing this continuously until you administer the finest and most subtle of all those razors.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	And in each of the other small capillary and subtle fractures, you must administer treatment according to what you determine is necessary for the correction of it.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is important to note that not all who have studied this art are equally skilled or reliable in its practice.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And we have demonstrated this on large fractures as well.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the panicle is extracted when you eradicate the bone, then it is necessary that you take cloth according to the amount of the wound, and submerge that in oiled rosewater, and place that over the opening of the wound; and then take another folded or tripled cloth and submerge it in wine and oiled rosewater and place that over the first cloth, making this as gently as possible so you do not harm the tissue; and then apply a linden leaf remedy on top, and do not tighten that beyond the amount necessary for the size of the wound.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And leave it with this treatment for one or two days until you are sure of the safety from abscess; then remove that and subsequently administer medicines which have excessive drying properties, such as flaxseed and wheat flour, and powder of rushes and aristolochia, and similar substances.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And it is that you should make these medicines into a powder that is sprinkled over the wound when they are dry; and generally, apply to it any medicine whose property is to cleanse without irritating.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And be careful according to your skill that the wound in your treatment is clean; and there should not be any deafness of pus or other corruption; nor should you allow virulence to accumulate in it; for when it is applied over the brain panicle, it corrupts that and harms it, leading you to cause a malignant evil to the patient.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And you operate on the skull, as it is modified by the bone and especially when the care of it is neglected, and there is blackness on its surface; therefore consider now if these accidents happen to the patient that we have mentioned, know that it is harmful in every way.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if no blackening occurs except from the medicine that is placed upon it, and it is due to that medicine causing such blackening, then you must take one part of honey and three parts of rose oil, and with those anoint a cloth, and then place that over the wound; and then treat that with the healing spices as befits until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III. 
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	For the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that the nose is not broken into more than two main parts, or one of those halves may be cartilaginous, because there are two bones in it, and the part that is cartilaginous does not break; thus, you only encounter friction, twisting, and sinuosity.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	If one of the two parts of the nose is broken, then you must insert your little finger into the inside of the nostril and align that fracture within with your index finger, while using your thumb from the outside to return the nose to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And this should be done easily by you, and be careful not to cause additional pain to the patient through your procedure.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the upper main part of the nose, and your finger cannot reach it, then it should be aligned using the tip of a probe that has a small thickness.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then you should treat it accordingly. 
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And treat with restoration of the patient on the first day of the fracture, if possible; and if not, then around the seventh or tenth day, you should rest from the abscess cauterization.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And then insert into the end of the nose a strip of linen cloth if the fracture is in one part, or use two bandages if the fracture is in two parts, and let the bandage be thick enough to fill the passage of the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And some of the ancient restorers say that the bandages should be dipped in pitch and changed throughout the day, but I do not agree with this; instead, it is better that the strip be soaked in egg white mixed with ground meal; then leave the bandage on until the bone is set and the cartilage has hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And sometimes a strip of goose fat wrapped in linen cloth is inserted into the nose instead of a bandage; this is used when the nasal fracture is severe and to ensure that the patient's breathing is not obstructed.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this method is not necessary for you; if you wish, do this, and if you prefer, use bandages.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if swelling occurs again, apply a poultice to the nose with wax or fat mixed with sweet wine and rose oil, or use diachylon (a type of plaster).
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	And if you do not apply cautery to the abscess, then it is necessary to cover that area externally with flour of fenugreek and powder of crushed violets mixed with egg white; and then place a lion's foot (a type of herb) over it, and do not unseal its nose for any reason.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	If the bones of the nose are fractured or comminuted, then you must incise over them and extract the fragments with instruments suitable for that purpose; then close the wound and treat it with substances that promote healing and consolidation, and with plasters appropriate for this condition.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if there is an inflammation inside the nose, then you must treat it with cauterization and administer lead tubes until it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter IV.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the restoration of the jaw when it is fractured.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not inflamed, then observe if the fracture is only on the outer side and has not been split into two parts nor bent inward; in this case, the treatment is simple.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, you should insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth; and similarly, if the fracture is on the left jaw, then insert the right index finger; and with that finger, push the joint of the fracture inward easily to the outer parts, using your other hand on the outer part of the bone; in this way, you properly align it.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, then you must administer extension from both sides according to straightness until it is possible to align it.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if you encounter the displacement of teeth to disruption, then strengthen those which you hope will remain with a thread of gold or silver or wax; and then place cerot over the broken jaw, and then place a doubled cloth over it, and place a well-made pad or a piece of sole leather equal in length to the jaw over the cloth; and then bind it according to how you have prepared the bandage for it and apply it appropriately until it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to use rest and tranquility, and give them food that is easy to digest.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you suspect that the shape has already been altered in some way, then on the third day, you should be cautious and loosen it; then correct what has already been altered and apply a plaster made with ground meal, egg white, or hemp flour, after you have removed the cerot from it, and place wool over the plaster.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then, as it is attached and adjusted that plaster on him, and the position of the bone is not altered, leave it like this, do not remove it until it is healed and the fracture has strengthened; for often this fracture heals in about three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another abscess occurs in the same area, then administer what we have said multiple times during the patient’s treatment until it is healed, and let that abscess be treated accordingly.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is accompanied by a wound, then consider whether it is a fragment of bone that is separated or splinters, then you must be subtle in removing those splinters with what is appropriate for that purpose in the removal of those fragments.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the opening of the wound is narrow, then you should enlarge it with trephination according to your need.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	Then when you have performed those procedures, and no pus comes out of them, then sew up the wound opening if it is large; and if not, apply one of the plasters suitable for this purpose to heal that area until it is healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On the restoration of the collarbone when it is fractured.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	Often the collarbone is broken in front of the muscle, and this fracture can occur in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	For it is either broken, separated, or divided into two parts without any complications; and its restoration is easy. Or it may be such that there are complications, making its restoration difficult. Or it may be such that the fracture is accompanied by a wound.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the procedure in this case, when the fracture is accompanied by a wound, is that you should have two assistants present, so that one holds the splint and follows the broken collarbone, and the other extends the shoulder to that part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And then align the fracture with your fingers in such a way that it takes the desired shape, and there should be neither slight prominence nor depression.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you need more extension, then it is necessary to place a roll under the patient's limb wrapped in cloth or wool, and its size should be according to your requirement; extend and lift the fork and compress the roll with your hand until you align the fracture as desired.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot pull the end of the fork to the outer parts because it has reached the elbow, then the patient must be laid on their back, and place a cushion of moderate size over the muscle.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the attendant should press on the muscle below so that the bone of the fork is lifted towards the elbow, and then you should correct the fracture and align it with your fingers.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	But if you feel splinters of the fork and they are causing harm, then you must cut into that area and remove those splinters with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is retained in the bone, then you devise an incision with one of the incisors which you have prepared for this, since you have placed the forked stirrup that serves as a clamp; and the stirrup is made of wood or iron, and this is its form:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it is similar to a spoon, of which this is the concavity; and its width should be according to what you need from it, according to the size of the bone or the scarcity of it.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	And let the length of it be as much as is possible for you during the operation; that it have two ends just as you need, and one end be wide and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the wound that you have incised when you have extracted the splinter from the bone is wide, and it is secure from inflammation, then you should approximate the two edges of the wound with stitches.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is small, or you fear inflammation, then fill the wound with cloths and poultices according to the amount of the裂伤的伤口。  
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if you encounter an abscess that needs cauterization, then soak a cloth in vinegar and rose oil and wine, and place it over it.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	When dealing with the fixation of a bone that is fractured and cut, you should place a plaster made from ground wheat flour mixed with egg white on it, then put a linen cloth over the wound. Next, if necessary, use titillation (gentle irritation) to promote healing, and apply another layer of poultice. Then take a bandage used by the Saracens, which is about a palm wide and long enough to cover the area; place double cloths on top of the wound and plaster. Take a fine wooden board about three fingers wide and similarly long, wrap it in cloth, then wrap that cloth with the board over the fracture site. Apply the poultice as described earlier, wrapping it around the neck, using titillation if needed, and apply it to all parts. Repeat this process until the bone is properly set and no longer displaced.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And it is also necessary that the splint over the broken bone not become loose; and for this reason you must visit the patient every day, so that when the bandage becomes softened or you see the splint already become loose, then you correct this and strengthen the binding.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	Then place the patient's pillow under their neck, and place a small cushion under their shoulder so that when they sleep at night, their arm on that side is elevated; thus, the clavicle fracture is lifted by the elevation of the muscle; or have their arm tied to their neck.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not loosen the bandage unless suppuration or an abscess occurs at the site within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	Then renew the plaster if you have seen that its surface has come to this state, and adjust it to the constriction, restore it, and leave it until it is restored and the clavicle fracture is coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and healed according to the same in twenty-eight days, and sometimes in some men, it happens in less time.
Capitol .vi.	Capitol .vi.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	For the restoration of a shoulder fracture.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	A spatula is broken in the left side of him and not from him but from the edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And thus when the place is broken — and it is broken in the middle part of him — and it is not known except by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture force it into preparation, and reduce it according to its natural figure in every way of skill that is possible for you.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	Then place over the area powder of ground aluminum mixed with egg white and lion's wool; then place a layer of doubled cloth; then place over it a thin piece of board according to the amount of the entire spoon or perhaps a little more.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	But if the board leaves a concavity in some parts of the spoon, then fill that concavity with lion's wool, and then raise the board to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	Then strengthen over it with a long bandage wrapped appropriately and secure the board so that it does not move from its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the bandage every day; and whenever it becomes loose, bind it again and tighten it, and adjust the board if it has moved from its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And lay the patient on his side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the spatula is restored in twenty days or in twenty-five.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And so when this number is completed, then you loosen the binding, and you must be sure to know which of these are bones whose beginning is not feared nor their dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed from the location of the broken bone and place the splint there, then you cut into it [the splint], remove it, and do as we have said in the fracture of the collarbone; cauterize if an abscess occurs here.
Capitol .vii.	Capitol .vii.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	For the restoration of the fracture of the foot.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot is sometimes broken in the middle and heals slowly; however, the ends of it move and become misaligned and crushed.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And among the consequences when it is broken in the middle is that it tilts towards the inner parts and causes great pain, difficulty in movement, coughing, strong fever, and vomiting blood; and it is evident in the cavity of the broken bone and not hidden to the senses.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of it is that the patient should be laid face down, and a cushion should be placed between their shoulders; then press on the muscles and align the edges of the bone with your hands from both sides, performing the operation delicately and adjusting it in every possible way suitable for this purpose, until the bone returns to its proper shape.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And then place a plaster and tow on it, and cover that with a thin cloth made of suaze or caligi and similar light materials, wrapping them in cloth; then carefully bind the area over the broken bone so that it is not twisted; wrap it around the curved back several times and tighten it appropriately; and continually monitor the bandage, tightening it when it becomes loose.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if necessity provokes the loosening of that which causes corrosion or puncturing, or pain, or inflammation occurring in the area, then you cut and loosen that and remove the poultice and correct what happened through this method of healing; and then return the poultice, if needed to do so for its application; and secure it tightly until it is healed.
Capitol .viii.	Capitol .viii.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	For the restoration of the ribs when they are broken.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Know that a fracture of the ribs does not occur except in thick areas that follow the back; and from the ends of those broken parts in front, do not encounter such compression unless they are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And knowledge of it is not hidden from the senses through the investigation with words.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration should be such that the fracture is aligned with the bones according to the possible method, within which it should be fitted as needed, and then plaster and strengthen the broken bone with a splint, if you need that. 
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the ribs is extending inward, then the patient experiences severe pain and puncturing sensations, just as when pricked by thorns, and because the bone touches the membrane; and it leads to difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting blood; and this condition is difficult to cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And already the ants have been generated in that which is moist and generated.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And as for what I say here: one must prevent the patient from consuming foods that cause inflammation and gas, so that the stomach does not become inflated and extended, and the fracture is not pushed outward.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	And let us beware of that so as not to negligently cause the formation of an abscess, if it does not already exist; and if it has already occurred, then it aids in this.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And some of them say that a cupping glass should be placed on it and then suctioned with strength; this seems logical, but it is feared that the cupping glass might draw the excess substances to the area due to its weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And some of them say: the area should be covered with wool that has already been soaked in heated oil, and pillows should be placed between the ribs until it is filled, so that the binding is such that it envelops it like a second roundness; then the patient should be treated with treatments for pleurisy using food and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if the patient suffers from severe constriction that is intolerable, and the bone punctures the overlying tissue, we are concerned about the patient; therefore, we must incise over the area, expose the fractured rib, and then place an instrument over it to maintain the alignment, remembering which position should be maintained beforehand, and cut the bone with ease, and extract it.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And then we bring together the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with stitching, and treat it with plasters until it heals.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if you find an abscess inside, then apply and immerse pillows in oiled cloth and place them over the area, and treat the patient with what is appropriate for the internal abscess.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And let him lie on his side on which he sleeps until he is healed.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the restoration of fractures of the vertebrae of the back and the neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Sometimes fractures occur in the bones of the neck, and similarly to their articulations, and likewise in the vertebrae of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then consider: if their hands are already softened, numb, and dead, and they cannot move them, extend them, or grasp with them, and when you press them with your fingers or pierce them with a needle and they feel no pain, then you know that they will not be healed, and in such conditions, it is mortal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if you feel tightness and notice constriction with the fingers and puncture, then know that the bone joint is safe and that you will heal the patient with treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see signs of this in the vertebrae of the neck and want to know if it will heal or not, then consider the feet of the patient.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	And if you see that they are already softened, apply to them what is applied to the muscles, and then when he lies on his back, he has windiness and defecation against his will, and sometimes rolls onto his back and tries to urinate but cannot, then know that it is mortal, and thus do not labor in his cure.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	But if none of those causes apply, the cause is better and lighter.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the treatment is to perform the reduction of the abscess by placing over the affected vertebra oil or rose oil, or a poultice of boiled eggs; place that on it several times a day until the abscess is reduced.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And now apply one of the comforting and stimulating plasters, and bind it tightly with a bandage; and command the patient to rest and remain calm and not to sleep on the part where they feel pain until they are healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if it happens that you need to separate the friction of the bone or any other reason for which it is already detached from it, then you must dry over the wound and remove that bone; then bring together the two edges of the wound, with sutures if it is large; then treat it with some flesh-growing ointment until it heals.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	And if the posterior part of the bone in the buttocks, which is the end of the thigh bone, is broken, then you must insert the index finger of your left hand into the buttock and align the broken bone as much as possible with the other hand according to the principle of equilibrium; then place a plaster and splint over it if they are needed; then secure it firmly.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel that some bones are broken in it, then you should address that area, remove the broken pieces, and treat the wound with the previously mentioned treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De restauracio de la ancha.	On the restoration of the anus.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones around the anus can be broken, and if they break, then the fracture is typically at the extremities of those bones, running longitudinally and sloping inward toward the center; this causes pain in the area for the patient, puncture sensations, and the abdomen becomes numb when fractured.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over that area which is above the fracture, which is the shape of it.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is only at the extremity of it, then you align that as you are accustomed by setting equal between so that it resembles its natural form.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	And if the fracture is in the spine or has declined to the vertebrae, then you make the patient lie on their stomach until you prepare the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And then, once you have aligned that, place a plaster over it, and then place a splint of wood or bandage over that, and secure it tightly where you do not fear any puncture of the fracture nor dislodgment of the splint.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And align the cavity with something that fills it until it takes on a tight form according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on their back or on their side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	And if an inflammatory swelling occurs, then you stop the extension and restoration of it until the swelling is reduced, and place something over it to reduce that swelling as described previously; then return to the restoration of it, and secure it accordingly.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if the bones are splintered or crushed, then you treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	For the restoration of the fracture of the auxiliary [bone or limb].
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	Helpers are those who are between the thigh and the head of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, then the restoration of it is in one of two ways, of which one is that you take flat wood of medium thickness according to this form:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And let there be two ligaments at the two ends, and then let it be suspended from an elevated place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And place the patient on a seat; then extend their broken arm over the wood until it reaches the tip of it at the middle point where the curvature of the wood is attached.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And then suspend something heavy over that area, or the servant should extend that to the sides of it; and then the doctor should hold the fracture with their hands together until the fracture returns as it should.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other method is that the patient should be laid down on their back and suspend the arm of the collar with a ligament; then command two servants, one of whom holds what is above the fracture with their hands; and the other holds the part below it; and each of them extends to their respective side.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then you pull on the fracture with one bandage and on the other side with another bandage, and each of the two assistants should stretch their respective parts.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And thus if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, then it must be that half of the ligament is placed on the tendon and the other half under the fracture by the knee.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And similarly, if the fracture is near the knee, then it must be bandaged over that area and over the knee.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Apply that with ease and do your work, and then when it is properly adjusted as needed and applied correctly, strengthen that area if an abscess does not occur.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	But if an abscess does occur, then leave the binding until the seventh day, and place over it wool soaked in vinegar and rose oil until the abscess heals, and then strengthen that area.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the method to strengthen that area is to place a plaster over the fracture, and then put a wrapping of clean cloth over the plaster; and then adjust the arm with the support, and place your open hand over their muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And wrap the cloth and strengthen over the support the arm so that the arm is in a stable position, unless any cause from the broken bone prohibits this.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And now use splints.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And place over the fracture that splint which is broader and stronger than the other splints; and leave between each splint the width of a finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the break with an addition of three fingers on all sides.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then stretch over the stones with the bandage which I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And it is that your bandage over the site of the fracture should be tighter.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when the fracture is lengthened, the bandage should be looser.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And thus change the position of the stones and the bandage as we have said at the time when you restore the limb to its proper position.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear an abscess may form, then leave the bandage and the stones in place until the seventh day as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And then examine the wound in all parts for three days so that no pus or inflammation may occur in the area; and it is prohibited for food to reach the limb due to the excess of bandaging; and thus correct all of this according to what we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	But if you are confident that no cause for this will occur, then do not loosen the bandage until three days or more have passed.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the patient's body lie on its back, and their hands be upon their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place over the splint a pad filled with wool evenly, and consider at any time of night or day that the shape of the broken limb is not loose nor dissolved, or that the bandage is loosened; therefore, correct this entirely with your skill.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And place the food of the patient according to the order which we mentioned before, ensuring that the food is subtle at the beginning while it is started to be strained; and then it is necessary to thicken the food for them.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	For it is customary for the splint and the bandage to be tight for forty days; and then they must be loosened, and a bath should be administered and treated with ointments that correct that condition.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is severe and grinding, then you should not loosen the bandage and the splints for ten days or up to two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	For the translation of the given line:
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	Here is the translation of the given sentence:
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And often only the larger bone is broken, or the smaller one, and sometimes both are broken together.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the smaller bone above is broken, then its restoration is easy, and its healing is even easier.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the bone is broken below, then the fracture is bad, and its healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And worse than that is when two bones are broken together.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the broken bone is the smaller bone above, then it is appropriate for the doctor to restore it with slight extension easily before it heals.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the larger bone is the one that is broken, then it is necessary to apply more forceful extension.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both bones are broken together, then it is necessary for you to apply an even stronger extraction or manipulation.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And it is necessary to position your hand appropriately for its restoration with the extension stretched over a cushion, and let the thumb of your hand be on the upper parts more than all other fingers, and the little finger should be lower than the others, and the patient should be seated on a low stool.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And place a cushion in front of them at their height or straight ahead, so that the patient does not lean forward.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	Then the minister extends the arm from the lower part with his hand or with bandages, and another minister extends it similarly. 
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And then the doctor binds the bone back into place in the best configuration that he can.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if there is hesitation in setting the bone, then you must reduce every piece to its proper place with your skill.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if it appears separately that the joint is out of place and there is no hope in restoring it, then you should operate on it and set it according to the method we have described above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	But if the fracture is due to an infection, I have already devoted a separate chapter to this, and therefore take the treatment for that.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you should line a cloth with a wax made from oiled olive oil and white wax, which is halfway between thick and subtle, and tightly bind a strong cloth over it until the abscess releases; then remove the wax and apply a poultice prepared with ground meal and egg whites, and then place bandages; and let the bandage that is placed over this fracture be wider and stronger.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And know that the number of bones in the arm is seen in major dispositions, or rather a fracture in one part or two parts together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And then apply your bandage firmly and strongly on the location of the fracture, and when the bandage extends above or below the fractured area, make it a bit looser according to how the memory of it is described at the beginning of the chapter. 
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moist, and not hard nor rough, and the thread with which it is sewn should be of the proper thickness between fine and thick, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the limb and the joint for several days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if any cause occurs for which correction is necessary, such as when a swelling appears on the limb, and then it is necessary to soak the limb in warm water until that swelling subsides.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And leave the limb unstrained until it rests, and then apply the binding again.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the binding is already softened and the bone is realigned and resembles its original state, then correct everything with your skill.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider if the nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb due to excessive binding, for then it is necessary to loosen it slightly and leave it that way for several days until the nourishment flows to it, and then strengthen the binding.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	And if the patient does not suffer from any of the conditions we have mentioned, then it is not necessary to loosen [the binding] until about twenty days or around that time.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And then let the patient's limb be suspended and allowed to move freely, and make the patient sleep on their back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or in thirty-two days, or often it is restored in twenty-eight days, and all of this depends on the condition of the complexions and the conditions of the virtue.
Capitol .xiii.	The given text appears to be in an early form of a Romance language that shows similarities to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. The provided example translations suggest that this is an explanation of medical procedures or descriptions of ailments from a medieval treatise.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	For the restoration of fractures of the wrist and fingers.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Know that the wrist of the hand and the joints of the fingers often suffer fractures, and you should not touch them roughly but with gentle motions.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when you deal with a fracture or injury to the hand, then the patient should hang it down and in front of him place something at an appropriate height, and then place his hand upon that extended.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	Then the assistant should extend the broken bones, and the doctor should realign them where they meet with proper alignment.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And now you should apply a plaster and lint, unless there is inflammation, in which case use a cautery; then place a splint over it according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped it in linen cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	But if the fracture is in the parts inside the palm of the hand, then make a ball-like shape with cloth, and have the patient grasp this ball with their fractured palm; then secure it with long cloth straps.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And let the spine be lifted with cloth under it, so that the body is applied to the palm; and press it according to what is necessary.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	And if the fracture is on the outer part, then you must place a splint on it and another piece of the splint in the palm, so that the hand is open and straight; and then apply the bandage, just as the hand is wrapped around the wrist between the fingers with ligaments.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if you encounter a fracture in one of the bones of the fingers, then it should be aligned properly and subsequently strengthened with the palm. If you wish, place a small straight splint to elevate the fracture and prevent it from worsening.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	And if the fracture is in other fingers, such as in the middle finger, or in the index finger, or in the thumb, or in the ring finger, then it should be splinted and bandaged with the finger that lies next to it; or all of them can be bandaged together in a continuous manner, which is better; or place a small splint on it, just as we have said for the foot.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your treatment, and then that of the disposition of hot abscesses and their opposites — through your operation — with what is needed when any cause of these occurs, according to the repeated narration of it.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter XIV.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	On the treatment of fractures of the thigh bone.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The thigh bone is often fractured and this is evident to the senses as it causes the parts to shift forward and results in the highest level of swelling.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the treatment of it is done in such a way that the bandage is tightened over the fracture and another bandage is placed below the fracture, and the patient is laid face down on their stomach.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And then the minister extends the entire limb to its original position according to its nature, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	And if it is applied at the root of the thigh, then the limb should be bent towards the heel at the level of the patella, so that the extension can lie flat, and the other limb leaves the fracture. 
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And similarly, if the fracture is near the neck, then the bandage should be placed near the neck, and the extension should be made to the parts below it.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	Then the doctor equalizes the bone with both of his hands before reducing it according to its natural shape, and the bone is joined by a good union; at this time, it is necessary to apply a plaster and binding, unless swelling occurs in the limb.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	But if swelling does occur in it, then you should leave it for several days until the swelling has subsided, and then return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The binding of it should be done as follows: you must wrap a hard bandage over the fracture, fold it two or three times, and remove the excess; then wrap the limb until you reach the ankle and the root of the thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert a long strip of cloth between the thigh and the limb near the neck and extending downward, so that the ends of the strip come from the higher part of the two sides, and then wrap what is excess of the bandage around the limb and the thigh.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And then place your hand over the thigh at the site of that fracture, and put a splint on the bone of the thigh.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill the spaces between the chest and the thighs with soft cloths, so that the constriction is eased.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then begin with a strong binding over the middle of the fracture site using three or four layers, and as you move away from the area of the fracture, make your binding looser and lighter and softer.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And then extend the two ends of the bandage to the areas between until it reaches the ankle of the foot, and tighten both ends of the bandage on the other side so that the binding does not move from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then apply the binding in such a way that it does not cause any corrosion, abscess, swelling, or similar issues to the limb; and if any of these conditions occur, then loosen the binding, and correct whatever has happened as soon as possible, according to what we have said many times.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a piece of bone that protrudes in the wound, then you should smooth it out as much as possible; and if not, cover it and remove it, and treat it with methods that promote healing until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And sometimes this thigh fracture is treated by aligning the bones with stakes, as we have said in the helper and in the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	However, in the restoration of him in such a manner made, do not cause the patient to limp; and if it is restored alone, something other than applying the other side is necessary for that which is always affected.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And know that the thigh is strong in forty days or a little more or a little less, and all of this depends on the diversity of constitutions and other conditions.
Capitol .xv.	Capitol .xv.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	For the restoration of the fracture of the kneecap.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Know that a fracture of the kneecap can occur rarely, but it often happens due to atrophy across the muscles.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	And if you encounter a fracture, then it is not just a crack or break in its parts, and this is considered an injury or several injuries, and all of this has been stated with feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of it is such that what is broken in its parts should be aligned and joined together where they fit, according to what is possible by equalization and facilitation and construction.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And then apply a plaster and place it on that round spot, if you need to do so; and bind over it with a suitable bandage.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And then consider all the treatments that we have recommended for other fractures, such as applying a cautery to an abscess and similar procedures, which should be applied to any accident with what is appropriate until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	On the restoration of a fractured thigh.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Know that in the thigh there are two bones, one of which is thick and is named for the thigh itself; the other is slender and is called the fibula.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And it happens to some types of fractures that what occurs to the two bones of the arm also happens, and thus the restoration of it is done in the same way as the restoration of the arm, and its operation is similar.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if both bones are broken together, the thigh is displaced in all directions.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the more delicate bone is fractured, the chest is turned towards the parts in front. 
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the thicker bone is fractured, you will find it thus, and it is one of those causes that are not within your control.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And then administer extension, equalization, and ligature of the splints according to that alignment.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, if the leg fracture is slight with small fragments, the extension should be less and lighter, and alleviate it with your strength.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the leg, there is also a reason for an operation on the arm, which is when you align the splints and complete your entire procedure. At that time, you will take wooden pieces of pine, which are placed under the causes that are set on planks, and they are made somewhat like palm branches; select those with smaller thickness, not too thick, and the length of those should be according to the length of the leg, and from the knee towards the foot.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then wrap each piece of cloth in two layers according to its length, and place one layer over the fractured part of the leg on one side and the other on the opposite side, starting from the knee towards the bottom area of the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And then bind the two splints in three places at both ends and at the middle point, because with this structure, the leg is prevented from tilting to the right or left side, and remains in proper alignment.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And already a wooden board has been administered according to the length of the chest; and it is placed on the patient's chest to prevent any movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And it is especially important that you do this in the case of a fracture, and when it is properly treated in this manner.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then every day, examine the chest and study it with the previous knowledge, and you will guard against abscesses, inflammation, or other similar causes; and when any of those causes occur, immediately attend to it with what is necessary until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	On the fracture of the ankle and the bones of the foot and toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	A complete fracture of the ankle does not often occur; however, fractures do sometimes happen in the bones of the foot; and fractures rarely occur in the toes, and they only happen to them during periods of predisposition or strain.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the foot do fracture and sometimes those bones become displaced among themselves, then the patient should place their foot on the prepared ground in such a way as mentioned.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	And then place your hand on what is raised from those bones, and then press those [bones], and push them back into their proper places in the area.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And then apply a plaster and bandage over it, and place a small table under the foot with two padded ends.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And then secure that with the foot using a proper structure, since you have wrapped it with cloths and other materials as needed.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And after three or four days have passed, then you untie the bandage, for you will find the bones realigned, whether they were broken or dislocated, and the operation on those is thus as you know.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if some fingers are broken, then restore them, and realign them as I have taught you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And then place a splint on the broken finger according to the length of the finger, and position it slightly to one side; then place the foot on the table that I have recommended to you, and secure it with a proper binding.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	And if what is taken from the bones is two or three or more, then you place on each toe a bandage of its quantity wrapped in linen cloth, and tighten the table at the lowest part of the foot, and stand with one end of the table to pierce the sole of the foot so that it has good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is important for you not to forget that you should not consider all the causes which are mentioned to you in other fractures and accidents we have discussed; and apply yourself to each accident with what is needed.
Capitol .xviii.	Capitol .xviii.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Regarding the fracture of the pubic bone of a woman and of the penis bone and the penis of a man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the neck of the woman is broken, then make her lie down in that fallen position, and then tilt her slightly towards the side of the back, and hold her behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And then the midwife fills the vessel with fat, and it is done in the vessel of the patient as if by hope; and then the woman is shaken, and the back of the child is raised little by little, for all this is forgotten until it appears at the opening of the vessel as if by hope and the broken bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And then place pillows under his back, and when he wishes to urinate, he will remove the cloth with ease and proceed to urinate; then return and restore everything according to the manner in which you first arranged it, and finally return him to his original pillow.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do this for seven days or around that time, for it is restored. 
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you wish, take a sheep's bladder and stretch a reed tube over the urethra; and insert the entire bladder into his penis, and then blow into the tube with force so that the bladder inflates inside the penis, for the fracture will return.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And then it is filled with fat and stays for several days according to what we have recommended, until it heals.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the penis bone of a man or woman is broken, then administer in its restoration and setting what we have recommended for the hip bone. 
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And what is right is not hidden in these proximate fractures which rarely occur, especially to one who has some study and use and understands my book; for that fracture signifies to you the greatest dispositions via the right way in its restoration and in its binding, and thus understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	And when the man's penis is injured, take goose fat and put the penis in it; then cover it with a cloth wrap, keep it wrapped up, and leave it for three days or so, and it will be healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	On the restoration of fractured bones when they are damaged.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is advisable for those in whom a fracture with inflammation occurs, especially if the bone is large, such as the thigh bone or the jawbone, or similar to these, that you should cut and perform trepanation on it immediately if the conditions for trepanation are evident to you or are testified by others, as we have said above.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the inflammation causes bleeding, then you must apply something to stop it, such as powdered and finely ground zega (a type of plant), unless another cause is present.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And then begin to restore the fracture on the same day, and do not delay this, unless an abscess occurs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	And if you catch an abscess with cautery, then you should leave the restoration of it until the ninth day, within which time the abscess will soften, and do not approach it on the third and fourth days altogether, because you would cause bad accidents.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	But if the fractured bone protrudes above the skin, then you must perform the reduction of it and align it with your hands easily and with minimal extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	But if you are not prepared to extend and align it with your hands, then you must reduce it with this instrument; the instrument which is made of iron, the length of which is seven or eight digits, and the width of which depends on the size of the injury; and therefore, it is necessary for the doctor to take three or four of these according to what is needed for this in the treatment of all kinds of fractures.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And it should be round, and it should have minimal thickness so that it does not bend when you apply pressure on it during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And it should have a sharp end with its edges rounded at the extremities; and the upper part of it should be somewhat thick, tapering from the middle towards the ends.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is its form:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is named in Greek "voluntary hernia," which is a small swelling.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	For it is necessary that the extremity of the limb be raised above the prominent part of the bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And press that in one go into where you return the bone, and align it with some adjustment. 
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And so force the ends of the fracture to come together, and if the broken end is delicate and does not allow for good leverage with the instrument, then you must incise the end of that bone where the instrument can have power over it.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	And if you cannot reduce the bone completely as we have recommended, then cut it with one of the incisors that we have mentioned; or saw through it with one of the saws in whatever manner is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	Then smooth out what remains rough and fragmented on the bone.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced, and during the reduction the patient experiences intense pain, then you should know that the bone has not been returned to its natural position; and therefore do what you can to provide great relief to the patient.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your restoration of the bone is complete, then soak a cloth in black styptic wine, and especially if it is summer, do not place cerot or any other oily substance on the wound, so that it does not cause putrefaction and corruption.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then administer fomentations during the period of complete bone restoration, and leave the wound uncovered so that you can cut away the scab with scissors and use bandages according to the size of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And be cautious to not confuse the wound with the fracture, for many foolish doctors have done this, causing their patients to suffer death or a corroding illness or suppuration, which is pus.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if your fracture is slight, soft, different from the other fractures. 
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the wound is large or it is a bad wound, and you fear that those accidents we have mentioned might occur, and you find pain in the area, then do not place a bandage on it, but instead create a wrapping of hard cloths instead of bandages and bind it with them.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when after one or two days the wound begins to generate pus, you then remove the cloth that was placed over it, and then administer unguents, ointments with which we customarily treat wounds, such as tetrapharmaco ointment and similar ones.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And it is necessary for you to loosen the bandage and examine the wound every morning and evening until it is consolidated and healed, and it must be that the limb is prepared in such a way that the pus can flow from it to its parts easily.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If many days pass over the wound, and it is not consolidated nor has the pus separated from it, then you should know that there are signs of small issues, for which you must examine the wound with a probe.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those issues, those that are separated should be removed and extracted. Those that do not separate and affect the limb causing pain, you must incise them according to what is possible for you to do.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if there is gangrene or ulcers in the wound, which are signs of other kinds of corruption and putrefaction, then you must apply one of those treatments that is appropriate for it, as previously described in its respective chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And concerning that in which my speech must stand and you present your part: when the large bone is fractured, elevate the limb as if it were the thigh bone or the shinbone and similar to those of the larger limbs, and do not assume extraction from it, nor its removal since often by doing so death occurs; leave what remains inside for it to rot, because naturally it will fall off in about 20 or 30 days; and then treat the wound if you see fit, and if not, leave it as is.
Capitol .xx.	It appears that you've provided a section marker or heading, "Capitul .xx.", which likely indicates the start of chapter 20 in a text. Without additional content following this header, there isn't any text to translate or further explain. If you have more text from this chapter that needs translation or explanation, please provide it!
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	Here is the translation of the provided line:
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Motives observed occur this nodulation in the vestige of the fracture healing, and more so when it is near the joints, and it distorts the shape of the limb; therefore, you prohibit the limb from its natural movement.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider if the swelling is recent and administer those medicines that have astringent properties such as alum, ashes, myrtle, cicuta, acacia, and similar ones; take some or all of these, compound them with astringent wine, or with egg white, or with sweet wine, and place this mixture on the swelling using lint, and bind it firmly.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And leave the binding in place for several days without loosening it; then loosen it and repeat another application until the swelling is reduced; or apply a piece of lead over it loosely, for lead has the property of reducing everything that is inflated in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if the swelling has already turned into a hardened state and is tight, and it is necessary to carefully remove it, then cut it open at its highest point, and excise the excess and prominent part, or reduce it using appropriate remedies until it is diminished; and treat it until it heals.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	On the restoration of a fracture when it is set, and then the limb remains delicate and does not heal according to its natural course.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is restored, and the limb then remains thin and weak, this does not happen without several causes: of which one is an excess of solution in the ligament and of the binding done incorrectly; or due to excessive tightness in the ligaments that prevents nutrition from flowing to the limb; or by excessive application of ointment; or by unnecessary movement at the wrong time; or by a lack of blood in the patient's body and their weakness.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the treatment for this is to feed the patient and make their heart tender until blood is multiplied in them; administer baths; and bring joy and happiness to them.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	Then place a poultice on the limb so that the poultice attracts nutrients to it, or continue to apply a warm water compress until the nutrition flows and returns to its natural state.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	On the treatment of broken bones when they are restored crookedly and prohibiting the operation that is necessary for them.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When you encounter a limb already restored near the healing of a distortion and prominence in the fractured bone and knotting, which is due to the shape change of the limb, yet the limb is not prohibited from its natural function, therefore, there is no need for you to accept the statement of one who suspects that the limb has been newly fractured.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	But there are indeed foolish doctors and restorers who have done this in our land; and this operation is highly condemnable, leading to great fear, the sign of which is mortal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	But if the limping and knotting are recent, then they should be treated with tepid water in which mollifying herbs are boiled, such as the leaves of elder and its roots, and mellilot, and similar ones; and it should be made into a plaster with a softening plaster like well-made diachylon; or mucilage from the root of elder should be taken and mixed with green vitriol or oil of cerami, and applied in a plaster; or fatty figs should be crushed with pigeon droppings, and similar medicines that are named for consolidating.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And at times it is dissolved with persistent gentle friction using wet hands, and the limb should be moved in all directions at all times.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr,
Capitol .xxiii.	Capitol .xxiii.
De sermo en dislocacio.	From the text provided, it seems like we are dealing with a medieval medical treatise that mixes elements from Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. The language structure suggests a form of medieval or early modern Romance language. Let's translate the given sentence:
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when you encounter a dislocation, then it is necessary to immediately attempt to reduce it, and do not delay the reduction, for if it is delayed, the area becomes inflamed and it makes the reduction of the dislocation difficult.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for this reason, it should not be massaged or stretched during the time of inflammation, because frequent movements can cause spasms and intense pain.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	However, when this occurs, then you should prepare for the flaubotomy of the patient, and allow time for the inflammation to rest; then apply warm water and oil to the limb, and afterwards reduce it with ease.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And every limb should be treated in such a way that its proper function and position will be restored.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And I have already ordered the chapters on dislocation according to how they are preceded by fractures; from the part of the body considered most superior to the part considered lowest.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	On the treatment of dislocation of the lower jaw.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	So dislocated the two jawbones do not hurt; and the dislocation of both is done according to one of two ways: either they are moved slightly from their places and softened a little; or they are dislocated by complete dislocation, in which case they must be softened at the joint where saliva flows from the patient and cannot keep that position nor can they close their mouth, with the tongue being wrapped in saliva.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	When the dislocation is slight, then in most cases it returns by itself with little cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	But if the dislocation is complete and total, then it must be gently reduced, and should not be delayed at all.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And it is that the minister holds the head of the patient, and the doctor inserts the thumb of one hand into the area of dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth of the patient if the dislocation is on one side; or inserts both thumbs together if the dislocation is on both sides, while the other fingers of the hand remain outside to balance; and commands the patient to relax their jaws and allow them to move from each side; and the doctor balances the jaw and pushes it until it returns to its proper place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated, then administer an evaporation with hot water and oil until the gentle reduction of both is made, and do not delay the reduction of both at all, as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And thus when they are returned and balanced, if the mouth of the patient is closed and does not open, then place cloths with cerot (a type of ointment) over them, which should be made of wax and oil mixed together; and then bind it gently with moist linen.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient lie on their back, and their head should be placed between two bolsters, so that it does not turn to the right side nor to the left; and do not force them to chew anything; during this time, their food should be a lion's portion [likely meaning a generous or hearty meal], until such time as the pains are alleviated and the jaws unclenched, then let them eat what they wish.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And this should be administered easily, and do not work against the opening of the mouth by forcing food, drink, and speaking, until the jaw is unclenched and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if it is difficult to reduce two dislocated jaws when they are out of place and do not return to their proper positions, then often fevers and frequent urination occur, and the patient's belly is quickly inflamed, and they vomit pure bile.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see this, then know that it is a bad sign; and often the one to whom this happens dies within ten days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	Of the reduction of the dislocation of the clavicle and the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The clavicle is not dislocated inward due to its continuation with the shoulder; and sometimes it is dislocated outward, and this is evident to the touch.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	Then compress the area with your palm using strong pressure, for it will return to its place.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	Then place an ointment and a poultice on that area and apply pressure to it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	However, the extremity of the elbow that is connected in this way does not get dislocated at any time; therefore, it must be reduced and aligned as we have said and according to your equipment.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	Then place an ointment and a poultice on that area, apply bandages, and instruct the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until they are healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And with this method of treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	It seems like you've provided a section heading, "Capitul .xxvi.", which translates to "Chapter .xxvi." or "Chapter 26" in English. This indicates the start of Chapter 26 in whatever text or manuscript you're referencing. If you have any specific content from this chapter that needs translation or explanation, feel free to provide it!
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the reduction of muscle dislocation.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle is dislocated in only three ways, one of which is when it is dislocated at the part near the tendon.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is when it is dislocated at the upper part of the muscle, and this occurs slowly; it is not dislocated at the parts behind by the shoulder; nor is it dislocated at the front parts by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And it is more frequently dislocated and pushed out at the lower parts near the tendon, especially in those whose muscles have little flesh, where it dislocates easily. However, in those with more flesh, it is pushed out with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And forcefully you apply percussion or impact to them, and the muscle of theirs becomes inflamed with a hot inflammation, and it is known by this that it has already been dislocated. 
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then it is necessary that you proceed with this while you are carefully attending to him, and now progress in his treatment.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And the dislocation is known when it is at the ends of the tendons; so that you can distinguish between a dislocated muscle and a normal muscle, for there is obvious difference between them; and you find a concavity at the head of the dislocated muscle and at its tendon, such that touching the head of the muscle feels like an egg, and the patient cannot bring their hand to their ear or move it in any way.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If the foot or its joint is dislocated, and you can feel it clearly, and it is not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And this dislocation is easily reduced when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of it is that the practitioner lifts the limb of the patient to its joints; and then places their thumbs below the tendon, and elevates the joint forcefully back into its proper place, and the practitioner lifts the limb, extending it outwards; and then places it down so that it returns easily.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	But if it does not return by the methods we have mentioned and remains as it was at the beginning when the dislocation occurred for several days, then the patient should be bathed in warm water and given an emollient that softens and relaxes, similar to a decoction of mullein, fenugreek, and mallows in water, which should be administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And then the patient is laid down on their back and placed under a soft pillow made of wool that is neither too light nor too stiff, and then the doctor places his foot on the sphere, and lifts the head of the muscle with strength, and holds the arm of the patient so it does not move from its position, and another assistant holds the head of the patient, so it does not move from its position, for that will quickly return to its place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, reduce that according to this method: have a man present who is taller than the patient, and stand on the side of that area, insert his muscle under the pillow of the patient and lift the pillow upwards so that the patient hangs in the air, and another assistant pulls the arm of the patient from below their abdomen.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	But if the patient is light, then it must be suspended with something else to weigh it down, for the dislocation will return quickly otherwise.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced in another way: a long pole with a round head, like the end of a mortar, neither too thick nor too thin, should be fixed into the ground; then place the patient on top of this pole, and put lion's cloth (or a strong fabric) over the head of the pole. The patient stands along the length of the pole, and their arm is extended to one side, while their body is pulled forcefully in the opposite direction, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if it is difficult to reduce it due to all the causes we have mentioned, then use this treatment: which is that you take a rod whose length should be two arms' lengths, and its width should be four fingers wide, and its thickness should be light in proportion to the tickling effect according to this form:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And then place linen cloths over the round head so that the fire does not hurt the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And then the patient's body should be laid down, and their hand or arm extended over the stick placed between the parts below, and the stick should be tied to the support and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Then place the arm on a step of a ladder according to its latitude, and the hand should be extended towards the parts below it, and the other body part should be suspended from the other side, for the joint will soon be set in place. 
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the insertion of the tube is completed in any way that is possible for you, and then it is necessary to place under it a thin woolen cloth of equal thickness; and then apply a plaster prepared with powdered mallow seeds and egg white over all the muscle, so that it is spread on top, and then secure the thin cloth tightly; and the bandage should be wrapped around the plaster, and the hand of the patient should be attached to their neck, and it should be left like this, and the hand of the patient should not be moved for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And it is necessary to reduce the food of the patient for a while, until the limb is strengthened, because it is easier for the recovery of the patient.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And then increase the food gradually over seven or five days and exercise a movement; and if it is stabilized and not softened, then it is healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	But if the joint is dislocated repeatedly due to humidity that affects it or for other reasons, then it is necessary to apply a cautery with three burns, as previously stated in the chapter on cauterization.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all of this is done and after seven days the bandage is removed and the joint does not hold firm, and the plaster and the binding are reapplied several times but still do not hold fast and the arm cannot be raised above the parts below, then you know that the nerves, which are at the head of the muscle, have been cut or stretched or weakened, and understand that the joint will never fully return to its place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	Regarding the dislocation that occurs between the foot and the ankle or the parts behind it, the reduction is done with impulse and extension using the hands until it returns to its proper position.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And another binding should be applied in that area, and care for it until it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if during the healing process you notice heaviness in the limb and slowness in its movement, then the patient should use baths several times until that heaviness is alleviated and it returns to its original natural state.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the treatment of dislocation of the knee.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	Understand that the joint of the knee is displaced with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; and it is displaced in all directions, more so forward than backward. The displacement of it is not hidden from you whether you are looking at it or touching it according to whatever figure it is displaced. And when you adjust the dislocated knee with your hand, this is clearly evident to you because the joint is concave and cannot bend the leg, nor can it touch its own muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And it is necessary to cool and reduce the displacement as soon as possible before it becomes inflamed with a cautery, for if it does become inflamed with a cautery, the reduction is difficult, and full healing is not easily achieved; especially when it affects the back areas, which is worse than all other types of dislocation, causing more pain, and often leading to death with that condition.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce, is that the patient's hand be extended with two fingers, and their arm be spread out, and the doctor’s hands should be on the knee and below it, and they should push the joint with the tips of their fingers together, or with the edge of their palm until it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	And if the dislocation is in the front parts, then return it so that you bend the hand with your own hand, until you percuss the kneecap with the edge of your palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not obey reduction, then administer strong extension and forceful motion.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And it is that two assistants should stretch the arm, and hold the limb with both assistants so that the extension is not weakened.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	Then the arm should be rotated in all directions, since it is wrapped with a long folded cloth over his hand or joint.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, anoint it with some oil so that those causes which help in the lubrication of the joint are facilitated; then force the joint with strong pressure until it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	Then for the reduction of a dislocated shoulder, it should be placed on that bandage which has astringency and exsiccation with egg white, and it should be pulled with downward traction, and the arm should be suspended from the neck, and left like this for several days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	Then it should be loosened; and if the joint is put back in its place, then you untie the binding from it and leave it.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see that the joint is not well healed, then apply the plaster and bandage again, and leave it on for several days until it is fully healed; and then remove it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	And if you encounter serious issues near the reduction of the joint, and its position is in motion, then administer moist treatment with baths and gentle friction, and compression until it is relieved; or place something immobile over the joint to prevent movement, as it is a matter of fatty tissue movement; and then bandage it, leaving it on the bone day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then remove that, and place it in a bath; when it is soaked, then gently rub the joint with mild friction, and then apply something immobile over it again, as it is a case of moving swelling, once, and the second time, and the third time.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	using bath immersion until it is softened.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, place moist and scraped ox fat over it and bind it tightly; do this several times, for the moisture will help reduce it to its proper position.
Capitol .xxviii.	Capitol .xxviii.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	For the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder, it is about the joint that is between the arm and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	When the hand is dislocated sometimes it can be easily reduced, and the reduction of its dislocation is light, but this is not so for other joints; however, it must be done quickly in reducing it at the moment when it becomes dislocated, before the area swells or an abscess forms there.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of its dislocation is that you place the patient's hand joint on a table and the assistant extends that hand, while the doctor places their hand or palm on the prominence of the joint and pushes until it returns to its proper place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, it must be considered that if the palm is already dislocated towards the front of the hand, then the patient should place the back of their hand on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is towards the back of the hand, then the position of the hand should be naturally placed on the table so that the doctor's hand can press on the prominence of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And if it returns immediately, that is good; and if not, then strengthen that area with a soft bandage to prevent swelling and leave it be; do not repeat this, for if you do, it will not tolerate or allow the reduction of pus that may develop over the days.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	But nevertheless the joint remains according to its tortuous nature; and you do not notice in the patient any cause, except that the hand is softened and cannot hold anything firm; then know that the nerves are broken or crushed, and then there is no remedy for it but to strengthen it with a cautery near the injury, and thus you will provide some relief.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	When the wound has healed, then place over it the bandage we have recommended, and let it be left and tightened for five days; then let it be loosened and left, and let the hand of the patient be exercised.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	But if the movement of it is hindered and some heaviness occurs in it, then alleviate that with warm water and by friction several times until it is relieved.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	On the treatment of dislocation of the fingers.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Sometimes the fingers are dislocated completely out of place.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when any of those fingers is dislocated on the back or the palm side, then hold the finger and push the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns to its place.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And then support the head of the finger, suspend that part which is dislocated, and leave it like that for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then suspend it and extend it until it is properly straightened on that same day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when it is not swollen, bandage it according to that method, and do not stop unbinding it during the day and exercising with movement, and bind it at night; do this for several days until it is straight.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And do the same if it is dislocated at the wrist, bind it in that area and perform this as your first operation until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And similarly do the same when it is dislocated in other areas.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	On the treatment of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When a complete dislocation occurs in any of the vertebrae of the back or neck, and multiple vertebrae are displaced from their positions, there is no cure in such a case, for death is expected in the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And the sign of this is that the excretion of the patient is expelled beyond their will, and they cannot retain it; and often certain parts of the body are softened, such as his thighs or two sides of his chest or two arms of his, or one of those; or a vertebra is dislocated from its place, for often it is dislocated and often the relocation of these occurs in four directions.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	And when it is dislocated towards the back parts, it is called gelbozitation (a term that seems to refer to a specific condition or displacement). 
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	Here is the line-by-line translation of the provided text:
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And it says that in the case of gout that affects from the front part down to the feet, there is neither origin nor cure for that condition; and similarly in the case that affects both sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And of those [diseases], none is cured except that which affects the back properly with what I recommend.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And it is that the patient should be lying face down on a raised surface near the wall, and a moist warming agent should be placed under them to prevent their feet from being cold.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And then a straight pole should be placed, stuck into the ground at one end near the head of the patient, and another pole on the opposite side near the feet of the patient at the other end.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And the minister should hold one pole, and it should not be fixed in a hole; another minister should hold the other pole in the same manner.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then wrap something over the head of the patient and leave the initial bandage slightly loose; extend the end of the bandage to the pole that is near the head of the patient, and tie it there; then tighten another bandage over the hips of the patient, below the buttocks, towards the chest of the patient; and finally adjust all the bandages and tie them to the other pole which is near the feet of the patient.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And then the minister should extend the bandage to the part of the pole, and the two poles and the bandages should not be removed from their positions where they are placed, but rather they should not be fixed as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor should place his palms on the spine with force until it returns, or he can place them on a table, and then adjust the patient's feet on the table until it returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	But if it does not return in this way, then take a table of which the width or length is about three arms' lengths, and carve into the wall next to the patient a place where one end of the table can fit.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And then place half of the table over the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and presses well so that the spine is straightened and returns to its proper position.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, use a wrench that is turned by hand; and this is how you do it: place the head of the patient between the rear end of two poles, the length of which should be one arm's length, and place the head of the patient between the rear end of another set of two poles; and the distance between each pole should be one palm, and already there should be a hole made in each pole through which the wrench turns, and each should be firmly fixed to the ground so that they do not move.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And there should be one round pole on which the wrench is mounted, and it should be turned in the two holes of the two poles.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at one end of it is a hole in which the pole is fitted, the length of which is one palm including what turns; and the two other poles are similar to this one.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then tighten the straps that you have attached to the feet of the patient in the hole where his head is placed, and the straps that you have fastened to his thighs on the wrench that is placed under his feet.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then each turn should have a minister who turns the crank with their hand, and the doctor applies the spinal device as we have described.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the form of the crank: 
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And then ensure that the vertebra is returned to its place and the area is leveled. At this point, it is necessary to apply a drying poultice with egg white and then some tow; then place over the poultice strips of cloth whose width should be about three fingers or so, and the length should cover the area where the swelling was, and on top of the part of the vertebra.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then tie it with the bandage we have mentioned, and feed the patient with subtle nourishment until they are healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if any prominence remains in the area at the end of the healing process, then medicines that soften and cleanse must be administered for a long time through the method we have recommended; and already a sheet of lead is applied to that area.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And sometimes prominence occurs in the lower part of the spinal vertebrae, and it is caused by that dislocation; and it is that bone which you should not protrude because it would be dangerous to apply this medicine there, for doing so could cause fatal harm to you.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	On the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Know that the joint of the hip and the muscle joint only suffer dislocation and nothing more, and what happens to those joints does not occur to other joints with small movement and cavities.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the hip joint can be dislocated in four ways: it can be dislocated inward, outward, forward, or backward.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And it is more displaced inside the joints, and less so in the areas in front or behind the joints.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And the sign of dislocation in the joints is that when you align the leg of the sick person with the healthy one, it appears longer and the swelling is more prominent than on the healthy side, and the patient cannot bend their foot towards the sole, and this is where the inflamed bunion caused by a hard abscess occurs, so that the head of the thigh has already reached here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the sign of dislocation that occurs on the outer parts is that the symptoms are opposite to those described above.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	And the sign of dislocation in the front parts is that the leg extends fully according to its fullness, but it cannot bend where the pain is in the swelling, and if it tries to move, it cannot do so at the front; the urine is retained, and the swelling is inflamed, and the movement of the foot is toward the ankle.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And the sign of dislocation in the back parts is that it does not extend the swelling, nor can it bend forward beyond the ankle, and the leg is shorter than the other one, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the thigh moves to that location.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	And the reduction of these types of dislocation that you consider now is whether the dislocation is old and ancient, which has already become settled by having been near you administering the reduction and remaining according to its position; then it is not within the entirety of that cure; and thus it is not necessary for a prognosis to be made in that case.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	But in the case where the dislocation is recent and one of the four types of dislocation, then you must pay attention to this: return the joint to its place and extend it both internally and externally, and move it to the right and left, for it will easily return to its proper position and does not require further treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	However, if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a strong assistant and extend the arm of the patient from below, either by his hands or by a band that is tied over the arm above the elbow; and another assistant should extend the hand of the patient upwards so that he grasps the fingers of the patient; and then bind tightly with a band around the armpit, and have another assistant hold the end of the band.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And it is the extension of the limb or part within the armpit towards the part of the shoulder, or towards the back from the part of the spine.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And let there be an extension of all these at once so that the patient is lifted with their body off the ground and remains hanging.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this kind of extension is common to all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And therefore, if the dislocation returns as we have said, it will be good; and if not, then in every special case, what must be said about the proper treatment is necessary.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of the joint, when it is dislocated and the dislocation is inside, the patient should be laid on their side; then place the ligaments over the thigh at that spot between the head of the thigh bone and where the groin is; then extend the ligament upwards from the part near the groin to the higher part of the fork (femur).
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	Then another strong assistant should take the arms of the patient, grasp the thick part of the diseased thigh firmly, and extend it outward with great force, for this will return it to its proper place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this method is of a milder cure with which this member is reduced compared to the other methods.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	But if you are excused and do not obey the treatment with this method of cure entirely, then it is necessary to bind both feet of the patient together with a strong, gentle ligature around both ankles and both toes.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And let the length of each thigh be the quantity of four fingers, and let the sick person's chest be extended more than the other by the quantity of two fingers.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And then the patient should be suspended over the head of the post, and it should be in the house; and the length from the ground should be two arms' lengths.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And then command a strong young man to hold the head of the thigh, and let him be suspended with the patient by another young man, and the other young man, pressing the thigh strongly, forces it, because the joint returns to its place quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	And in the proper reduction, when there is a dislocation at an external part, the patient must lie on a soft surface as we have recommended when dealing with inflammation; and the limb of the sick person should be firmly placed over their chest properly and over their feet.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And then two sticks are placed, one under the feet of the patient, and the other under the head; and then sticks are adjusted in the middle of the thigh laid over which wet cloths are wrapped, so that the patient is not harmed by the stick being between their thighs, because you must prevent the extension to the parts from being pulled.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And then each minister extends to their part, and the doctor with his hand equalizes the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Therefore, if it responds in reverse, it will improve greatly; otherwise, apply pressure to that area diligently as we have described for gout by equalizing it.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	However, the patient must lie on their side quietly.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is in the front parts, then it is necessary to slightly extend the chest, and this follows the same procedure as described for the thigh; and the doctor places the palm of their right hand on the affected joint, and then compresses that area with the other hand, and with this compression, extends the part towards the neck.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is in the posterior parts, then it is not necessary for the patient to be stretched out behind them, and they are raised above the ground; rather, they must lie on a hard surface, just as treatment requires when the shoulder of theirs is dislocated outwardly, according to what we have said about placing them on two planks; and they lie face down with their ligaments extended, as we have mentioned, without delay.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And it is necessary to apply compression with a board on the place where you have put the joint.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Thus, when the reduction is completed as it should — and the sign of the reduction not being hidden from you is that you extend both thighs of the patient, and when you see them equal and the patient stretches their thigh and you expand it with its support, then you know that the member has returned as it should — now you align both hips, place padding and stretch with a bandage so that the joint is not displaced in any part; and keep the patient at rest for three or four days.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And then remove the bandage and the padding, and compare one thigh with the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	When you see those marks on the body, then know that the dislocation has already been fixed, and then let the patient go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any cause of softening, then return and plaster that area, and stretch it according to your initial structure, and leave it for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	Then unbind that area, and have the patient walk around for several days until it is strengthened.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On the treatment of dislocation of the jaw.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The jaw is dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated outward, inward, to the side more towards the back; and it is not dislocated forward.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of its dislocation is that you ask the patient to bring their chin towards their shoulder; then you will know that the jaw is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration for all types of dislocation is as follows: make the patient sit upright so that their chin extends forward if they can; place your two hands on their face and put their foot between yours; then hold their jaw with your palms, keeping them between your thumbs on the jaw with strength, and another assistant should extend their leg until the jaw returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And a sign of recovery is that the patient's abdomen adheres to the thigh without effort.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then apply a plaster and make the chest adhere to the thigh, and then bind those areas with a bandage for three days or four, and then unbind those.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not let the patient walk for several days until they are healed and strengthened.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	But if the reduction of it to you is necessary, then administer strong extension with ligaments, as previously described in the treatment of the hip.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	On the treatment of talus dislocation.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The talus is sometimes displaced by a slight movement, and sometimes it is dislocated completely, and the dislocation of it occurs either towards the inside or towards the outside.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of its dislocation is that the talus swells, moving towards the side to which it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	But the treatment for its displacement is an easy reduction, and it involves extending it easily with the hands and keeping it in place until it returns to normal.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	But in the treatment when it is dislocated according to the complaint, you must make the patient stand straight, and have a strong and valiant assistant from behind that person in the middle of them.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And then you should hold the foot with your right hand on the higher side, and with your left hand on the lower side of the foot at the ankle area.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with your left hand for two stretches, and then extend with your left hand; and push the toes of the foot with your right hand away from the chest.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And do this two times as we have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then push the toes of the foot towards the chest for the third time, and you should be at the ankle.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	Thus, it returns in one attempt or two following this method, and if the foot is straightened, it is good; and if not, then repeat the operation on it, for it will return to normal.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if it is prohibited for you to reduce it by the method we have recommended, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and place a small bundle tightly in the ground that fits between the patient's thighs, and you should wrap a cloth around it so that it does not slip away from the patient.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And then the minister holds their thighs, and another minister extends the foot with his hands or with bandages that lie on top of the ankle; and then each minister extends against the extension of their counterpart, and the penis is extended between the patient's thighs retaining it thus, so that the body of the patient is not pulled towards the sides due to its extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And then the doctor realigns the dislocation with his hands, and another minister holds the healthy thigh on the sides, for the dislocation returns easily. 
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And so when the dislocation is returned and the health of the reduction is declared to you, then apply a plaster and tightly bandage that area with strong bindings, and tie the foot to the bed with bindings.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And you must be careful of the nerves that are behind the talus, so that the binding over that area is not too tight and does not pull strongly on them.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	Then leave it for two or three days; and if the binding is loosened, tighten that area again.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	Then untie it on the third or fourth day, and prohibit the patient from walking for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if the patient must go [walk] before that time, there is no guarantee that the dislocation will not be dissolved and corrupted, and then it will not receive proper healing.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if you encounter an abscess, then you must administer during the reduction what was previously described in our narration, another method of treatment and application, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Capitol .xxxiiii.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	For the translation of the given line:
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	Cover that which is dislocated with slight extension of its work; and this which is not difficult should be light.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	If the dislocation is in some of the toes of the foot, then it is necessary to make the patient put their foot on the ground or a table, and they should be positioned as if walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	Then you stand with weight, and place your foot on the area near the joints that need attention, and then press it with your foot with force until it returns to its proper position, and ensure that it lies flat and does not appear raised in any part.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	Then place the patient's foot on a table that supports the entire foot, which has two ends, and then bind it tightly and securely for three days; then unbind it and let the patient rest by walking for several days until it is strengthened and recovery is ensured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	On the types of dislocations that are caused by blows or fractures or any combination thereof.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any of those causes occur, and you proceed with the treatment and restoration of the dislocation, death may sometimes result.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And by this, it is not required that over the treatment of him he presume, but only one who is wise in the art, long experienced, merciful and pious, not rash, not bold nor presumptuous; and who uses at the beginning medicines that can reduce swellings just as much, and leaves the patient to divine judgment, rather than to whom you hope for salvation from destruction, some relief from the illness, and in which there appears some hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And then immediately strive to reduce the condition at the onset of the cause, before it becomes an abscess.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then if the limb returns as we want, administer treatment that prevents an abscess and heals the wound with one of the most drying ointments suitable for it.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if a dislocation occurs with a fracture and you encounter separated bone fragments, then pierce the area around them, and proceed as we have said in simple injuries of those that are treated in the areas of these.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And guard and avoid, according to your ability, those things in the paths of fear as my teaching precedes you; for this is better for you to serve your Creator, and more lasting for your glory, and more beneficial for your body as you will see in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus, perfect the teachings of Avicenna from which God should be blessed.
Amen.	Amen.
